
FOREWORD
This NASA Technical Handbook is published by the National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration (NASA) as a guidance document to provide engineering information; lessons 
learned; possible options to address technical issues; classification of similar items, materials, or 
processes; interpretative direction and techniques; and any other type of guidance information 
that may help the Government or its contractors in the design, fabrication/assembly, 
construction, procurement selection, management, support, or operation of systems, products, 
processes, or services.
This NASA Technical Handbook is approved for use by NASA Headquarters and NASA 
Centers and Facilities. It may also apply to the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (a Federally Funded 
Research and Development Center [FFRDC]), other contractors, recipients of grants and 
cooperative agreements, and parties to other agreements only to the extent specified or 
referenced in applicable contracts, grants, or agreements.
This NASA Technical Handbook provides guidance for establishing NASA’s digital engineering 
acquisition framework that includes contractual language for Statements of Work and Data 
Requirements Descriptions (DRDs) in support of a digital engineering environment. It provides 
information referencing topics such as DRDs, model-based data definition (e.g. model-driven 
engineering [MDE]), digital data collaboration, architecture, interoperability standards, and 
general guidance to adapt the methods needed to implement digital engineering environments 
with support for model-based product/data acquisition requirements.
Requests for information should be submitted via “Feedback” at https://standards.nasa.gov. 
Requests for changes to this NASA Technical Handbook should be submitted via MSFC Form 
4657, Change Request for a NASA Engineering Standard.
 
HANDBOOK
1. SCOPE
1.1 Purpose
This NASA Technical Handbook provides guidance for establishing NASA’s digital engineering
acquisition framework that includes Data Requirements Descriptions (DRDs) and contractual 
language for the Statement of Work (SOW) in support of a digital engineering environment
(DEE).
A DEE will modernize how the Agency conceptualizes, designs, develops, delivers, operates, 
and sustains systems. A DEE will help enable collaborative digital engineering while integrating 
stakeholders with authoritative decentralized sources of data and models seamlessly across 
organizations and disciplines supporting life-cycle activities from concept through disposal.
Digital engineering is the integrated digital approach that utilizes authoritative sources for 
product and system data and associated models collaboratively across all product-involved 
disciplines supporting life-cycle activities from conceptualization through disposal (Pre-Phase A 
through F). A DEE enables the interconnected data, people, processes, and technology used to 
store, access, analyze, and visualize evolving systems' data and models to address the needs of 
enterprise-wide stakeholders. It provides information referencing topics such as model-based 
definitions (MBD) (annotated 3D CAD models), model-based analyses (MBA), model-based
systems engineering (MBSE), model-based enterprise (MBE) (aiding manufacturers to integrate 
system, service, product, process, and logistics models across the manufacturing/support 
enterprise), product data and life-cycle management (PDLM), and general guidance to adapt the 
methods needed to implement digital engineering product/data acquisition requirements
maximizing model representations. This NASA Technical Handbook supersedes NASA-HDBK0008, NASA Product Data and Life-Cycle Management (PDLM) Handbook.
A process for management of technical data is required by NASA Procedural Requirements 
(NPR) 7123.1, NASA Systems Engineering Processes and Requirements, for ensuring that the
data required are captured and stored, data integrity is maintained, and data are disseminated as 
required. A digital engineering acquisition framework requires that information technology (IT)
systems across NASA be made interoperable or federated to the extent needed to provide a 
secure, readily accessible environment to enable required collaborative digital engineering
capabilities. This framework augments PDLM and addresses the acquisition, retrieval, usage,
and storage of all program/project data in addition to the technical data used in the life cycle of a 
system.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
9 of 217
Implementing a digital, model-based acquisition framework negates much of the traditional 
document-centric approach in lieu of a digital engineering environment where digital models 
hold the information once housed in documents to meet the program/project’s decision or 
information needs in addition to supporting the product-related activities. To achieve the highest 
level of collaboration, interoperability, efficiency, and data availability, the implementation of a 
fully digital model-based acquisition framework environment is necessary. A model-based 
acquisition framework is intended to increase the probability of mission success by increasing 
the availability, effectiveness, and efficiency of data interchange and integration across like as 
well as disparate systems for availability of the right data to the right people at the right time, 
thereby enabling the right decisions and reducing risk.
1.2 Applicability
This NASA Technical Handbook is applicable to the complete program/project life cycle of
current and future NASA space flight single-project and tightly coupled programs and their 
projects as defined in NPR 7120.5, NASA Space Flight Program and Project Management 
Requirements, and is recommended as guidance in all other programs/projects. The example 
DRDs in this NASA Technical Handbook should be modified to meet each program/project’s 
and product’s needs.
This NASA Technical Handbook is approved for use by NASA Headquarters and NASA Centers
and Facilities. It may also apply to the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) (a Federally Funded 
Research and Development Center [FFRDC]), other contractors, recipients of grants and cooperative 
agreements, and parties to other agreements only to the extent specified or referenced in their 
applicable contracts, grants, or agreements. 
This NASA Technical Handbook, or portions thereof, may be cited in contract, program, and 
other Agency documents1
.
2. APPLICABLE DOCUMENTS
2.1 General
None.
2.2 Government Documents
None.
 
1 NPR 7120.10, Technical Standards for NASA Programs and Projects
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
10 of 217
2.3 Non-Government Documents
None.
References are provided in Appendix K.
2.4 Order of Precedence
2.4.1 The guidance established in this NASA Technical Handbook does not supersede or waive 
existing guidance found in other Agency documentation.
2.4.2 Conflicts between this NASA Technical Handbook and other documents are to be 
resolved by the delegated Technical Authority(ies).
3. ACRONYMS, ABBREVIATIONS, AND DEFINITIONS
See Appendix H.
4. DIGITAL ENGINEERING ENVIRONMENT ENABLING DIGITAL 
DATA ACQUISITION 
A digital engineering environment enabling digital data acquisition is, in its simplest form, an
environment that encompasses the collaboration of digital project and technical product data 
among participants. This environment will enable stakeholders to interact with digital tools and 
technologies largely built on the premise of MBE practices and methods.
A digital engineering acquisition framework consists of disciplined, collaborative processes and 
systems that plan for, acquire, and control the interoperable flow of product definition data 
(PDD), product configuration information (PCI), including associated product-related data
(metadata) that includes systems engineering, product engineering, design, test, procurement, 
manufacturing planning, operational, maintenance, and sustainment information throughout the 
product and data life cycles. A digital engineering acquisition framework is the set of processes 
that defines and utilizes associated information used to manage and execute the entire life cycle 
of product data from its conception, through design, test, and manufacturing, to service and 
eventual disposal. To do so requires managing the creation and changes to product data, levels of 
model maturity, product configurations, affiliated engineering data, data on the performance of 
the product components in mission environments, and product software and hardware. It 
integrates definition and product development data, processes (elements), tools, and business and 
analytical systems to provide users with a digital product information backbone for defining 
product configuration information in support of NASA programs/projects.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
11 of 217
An acquisition framework creates the foundation and baseline from which the digital engineering 
environment in an MBE for NASA programs and projects should be driven.
To effectively execute a digital acquisition framework, the following key areas must be applied:
a. Model-Based Data Definition (refer to Appendix C in this NASA Technical 
Handbook).
b. Digital Data Collaboration (refer to Appendix D in this NASA Technical Handbook).
c. Architecture (refer to Appendix E in this NASA Technical Handbook).
d. Interoperability Standards (refer to Appendix F in this NASA Technical Handbook).
e. Contractual Data Acquisition via Data Requirements Descriptions (DRDs) (refer to 
section 5 and Appendices A and B in this NASA Technical Handbook).
The assignment of Lead Systems Integrators is essential to ensure the completeness and accuracy 
of the integrated data/model sets. The systems integrator’s responsibility to develop integrated 
model sets is imperative to ensure consistency is in place and deliverables are clearly defined and 
adhered to.
A digital/model-based enterprise (see Figure 1, Digital/Model-based Functional Integration) 
further encompasses and enables the digital exchange of data among the various organizations 
supporting the entire products’ life cycle with its related activities from Pre-Phase A 
(concept/studies) through Phase F (closeout/disposal).
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
12 of 217
Figure 1—Digital/Model-based Functional Integration (Source: CIMdata)
Refer to Appendix I for additional information.
5. DATA REQUIREMENTS DESCRIPTIONS (DRDs) FOR
CONTRACTUAL DATA ACQUISITION
Digital engineering acquisition DRDs contain the contract language and associated standards 
necessary to execute digital data interoperability and provide collaboration governance, contract 
definition, and enforcement to properly define key decision point (KDP) deliverables. DRDs 
should fully describe the required data items (e.g. MBx models, documents, reports, and/or 
drawings) by providing its purpose (description/use), content, format, maintenance, submittal, 
etc., requirements.
Introduction of such contract language can ensure that data acquisitions are appropriately 
included into NASA contracts, guaranteeing the Government does not lose data, information, or 
knowledge produced during the contract and, ultimately, lowering cost and effort for both 
parties. Considerations are also made to ensure that the Government has access to data developed 
throughout the contract period and that information is effectively transferred/available to the 
various communities involved. Specific language needs to be implemented within several 
sections of the Request for Proposals (RFP) to enable this level of data definition, integrity, 
control, and access during and after the contract is put in place.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
13 of 217
Several pertinent DRDs are provided in Appendix A as a starting point for NASA 
organizations to define their specific needs for digital engineering.
Appendix B provides guidance in developing data acquisition contract language.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
14 of 217
APPENDIX A
DATA REQUIREMENTS DESCRIPTIONS (DRDs)
A.1 PURPOSE
This Appendix provides recommended example DRDs for supporting digital and model-based 
acquisitions are as follows:
 DRD Purpose and Instructions. (Refer to A.2.)
 Technical Data Package (TDP). (Refer to A.3.)
 Engineering Model-based x (MBx) Models and Associated Data. (Refer to A.4.)
 Configuration and Data Management Process Audit (CMPA) (Refer to A.5.)
 Configuration and Data Management Plan (CDMP) (Refer to A.6.)
 Configuration Status Accounting (CSA) (Refer to A.7.)
 Specification and Drawing Trees (SDT) (Refer to A.8.)
 Engineering Models, Drawings, and Associated Lists (EMDAL) (Refer to A.9.)
 Change Request (CR) (Refer to A.10.)
 Functional Configuration Audit/Physical Configuration Audit Documentation (AD) 
(Refer to A.11.)
 Requirements Exchange Format (REF) (Refer to A.12.)
 Master Records Index (MRI) (Refer to A.13.)
 Contract Language for Data Acquisition and Interoperability (Refer to A.14.)
 Recommended Configuration Management (CM) Statement of Work Section for 
Contractors (Refer to A.15.)
The purpose of, and instructions for, utilizing, and examples of DRDs with example content are 
provided on the following pages. The choice to use specific DRDs and the content included on those 
DRDs needs to be selected and tailored by each acquirer (program, project, etc.) and likely needs
inclusion of additional DRDs for their given agreement. Acquirer should emphasize and maximize 
the use of Agency approved or endorsed standards, neutral formats, etc., and avoid specifying 
specific vendor or proprietary formats wherever possible.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
15 of 217
A.2 DATA REQUIREMENTS DESCRIPTION (DRD) PURPOSE AND
INSTRUCTIONS
PURPOSE OF THE DRD
The DRD should fully describe a deliverable data item (e.g. model, database, item/object, 
document, report, etc.) by providing the specified purpose, content, format, compliance 
standards, maintenance, and submittal requirements levied upon the Contractor. The delivered 
data item will enable assimilation into the receiving organizations’ information systems/tools 
with little or no post-receipt processing (beyond the data item’s verification). The DRD examples
provided are for a contract data requirement; however, a DRD may be used for an inter-Agency 
(Supplier) agreement with some tailoring. The DRD defines the requirements the 
Contractor/Supplier is contractually obligated to meet when preparing and submitting the data 
item described by the DRD. All DRDs for a particular contract are combined/assembled in one 
Data Procurement Document (DPD). The DPD is an attachment to the contract and a companion 
document to the Statement of Work (SOW) or Performance Work Statement (PWS). Each DRD 
should be invoked by relevant SOW or PWS language included in its applicable section.
Following is an explanation of each item on the example DRD:
DRD ITEM EXPLANATION
1. DPD/DRL NO.: Indicates the unique number assigned to the Data Procurement Document 
(DPD)/Data Requirements List (DRL) of which this DRD is part. DPD/DRL numbers for 
each contract DPD are obtained from the [Enter Agency/Program] Data Requirements 
Manager (DRM). Control Processes/Approval Authority for DRLs are defined in the Data 
Management Plan and/or Statement of General Requirements (SGR) for that 
program/project.
2. DPD STATUS: Indicates the status of the DPD/DRL (e.g. Draft, RFP, New, Subsequent 
Revision).
3. DRD NO.: Indicates the unique DRD identification number, which is comprised of (1) 
three- or four-digit DPD number; (2) two-letter Data Category designation (refer to Table 1, 
Data Category Designations); and (3) three-digits assigned sequentially within the Data 
Category. Data Categories may be tailored per task application.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
16 of 217
Table 1—Data Category Designations
CD - Contractual Data HE – Human Engineering QE - Quality Engineering 
CM - Configuration 
Management 
LS - Logistics Support RM - Reliability and 
Maintainability 
DE - Design and 
Development Engineering 
MA - Management SA– Safety 
DM - Data Management MP - Materials and 
Processes 
SE - Systems Engineering 
EE - Environmental OP - Mission Operations SW - Software
4. DATA TYPE: Provides a code number(s) that corresponds to the approval requirements 
for the submitted data item. Enter the type of data (refer to Table 2, Data Types for 
Contractor Deliverables) according to the contractually applicable requirements, e.g. 1, 2,
3, etc. Data Types and approval requirements for each data type are defined in the DPD 
SGR.
Table 2—Data Types for Contractor Deliverables
The data type indicates the level of Government control to be applied.
Type 1 All issues and interim changes to those issues require written approval from the 
requiring organization before formal release for use or implementation. 
APPLICATION NOTE: Because Type 1 data requires Center approval before use, 
if Contractor-produced data is to be placed under Center Configuration and Data 
Management (CDM) control as part of the Center baseline, the data should be 
designated as Type 1.
Type 2 NASA reserves a time-limited right to disapprove in writing any issues and interim 
changes to those issues. The Contractor shall:
a. Submit the required data to NASA for review not less than 45 calendar 
days** prior to its release for use. The submittal is considered approved if the 
Contractor does not receive a disapproval or an extension request from NASA 
within 45 calendar days**. 
b. Clearly identify the release target date in the “submitted for review” 
transmittal***. If the data is unacceptable, NASA will notify the Contractor within 
45 calendar days** from the date of submission, regardless of the intended release 
date***. 
c. Resubmit the information for reevaluation if disapproved. 
**APPLICATION NOTE: This 45-day time limit may be tailored for individual 
DRDs to meet the requirements of the procuring activity. 
***APPLICATION NOTE: If the Contractor does not identify a release target 
date or if the intended release date is shorter than 45 calendar days from the date 
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
17 of 217
of submission, the 45-calendar-day review cycle stands (or the tailored Type 2 
time limitation for the specific procurement).
Type 3 These data shall be delivered by the Contractor as required by the contract and do not 
require NASA approval. However, to be a satisfactory delivery, the data shall satisfy 
all applicable contractual requirements and be submitted on time. 
Type 4 These data are produced or used during performance of the contract and are retained 
by the Contractor. They are delivered only when NASA requests in writing and in 
accordance with the instructions in the request. The Contractor shall maintain a list of 
these data and shall furnish copies of the list to NASA when requested.
APPLICATION NOTE: Federal Acquisition Regulations 48 CFR § 52.227-16, 
Additional Data Requirements, has to be included in the contract to get delivery of 
this data.
Type 5 These data are incidental to contract performance and are retained by the Contractor 
in those cases where contracting parties have agreed that formal delivery is not 
required. However, the Contracting Officer or the Contracting Officer’s 
Representative shall have access to and can inspect this data at its location in the 
Contractor’s or subcontractor’s facilities or in an electronic database accessible to the 
Government.
5. DATE REVISED: Indicates the date the DRD was revised after contract award via 
contract modification. “Date Revised” will contain a date only if the DRD was revised 
after contract award. Prior to contract award, this item should be blank.
6. PAGE: Indicates the current DRD page number and total number of pages in the DRD.
7. TITLE: Indicates the title of the data requirement described by this DRD.
8. DESCRIPTION/USE: Indicates a brief description and/or purpose for the data item
described by this DRD. One or two sentences are often adequate.
9. OPR: Indicates the Office of Primary Responsibility (OPR) organization designated to 
exercise technical or administrative control over the data requirement. The OPR code does 
not necessarily indicate the organization code for the data item reviewer(s), typically the 
subject matter expert(s) (SME) for data item(s).
10. DM: Indicates the organization code for the Data Manager (DM) (for program/project) 
or Center organization procuring the data. Enter the appropriate DM code, e.g. ENB XX, 
CM YY, QUAL ZZ, etc. The DM is usually selected by the project office and represents 
this office on formal data requirements. The DM organization typically receives and 
subsequently processes (distributes, etc.) the submittals.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
18 of 217
11. DISTRIBUTION: Indicates the distribution requirements for the delivered data item. 
Individual organization codes or a separate distribution matrix may be referenced here for 
specific DRD deliverables. If “Per Contracting Officer's letter” is indicated, the Contracting 
Officer will provide specific distribution requirements to the Contractor via a separate letter. 
This method is preferable because it does not necessitate a contract modification to change 
distribution requirements.
12. INITIAL SUBMISSION: Indicates the submittal due date for the first submission of 
the data item to be prepared in response to this DRD. The due date should be a milestone 
rather than a specific calendar date (e.g. “30 days after contract award” instead of 
“January 5, 2006”) to better accommodate schedule changes.
13. SUBMISSION FREQUENCY: Indicates when the submission is due (e.g. “Critical Design 
Review”) or frequency (e.g. monthly, quarterly) for subsequent submissions of the data item
to be prepared/delivered in response to this DRD. These due dates should also be milestones 
instead of calendar dates.
14. REMARKS: Provides reference/guideline documents/information and special 
instructions/remarks to the Contractor/Supplier not included elsewhere on this DRD. It is 
acceptable to have no entry or “NA” (not applicable) under “Remarks.”
15. INTERRELATIONSHIP: Indicates Statement of Work (SOW) or Performance Work 
Statement (PWS) paragraph numbers, other portions of the contract, or other DRDs in the 
DPD that reference or interrelate with this requirement (e.g. “SOW paragraph 4.3,” “DRD 
XXXMP-001”).
16. DATA PREPARATION INFORMATION
16.1 SCOPE: Provides a short summary of the content of the data item to be prepared and 
submitted in response to this DRD.
16.2 APPLICABLE ITEMS: Provides documents, sources, templates, etc.—those items
applicable to the preparation of the data item requested by this DRD. Applicable items
should provide content and/or format requirements for the deliverable data item in 
accordance with specified standards or provided templates. The applicable items have to
be referenced in DRD sections 16.3 or 16.4 to indicate how they apply to the preparation 
of the item.
16.3 CONTENTS: Defines the required scope and contents of the data item to be prepared in 
response to this DRD. Applicable items providing content requirements may be referenced 
here or specific content requirements may be delineated. Applicable items should be 
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
19 of 217
referenced here, if appropriate, with specific application, i.e. “The data shall be prepared in 
accordance with YYY-STD-XXXX, Section X, paragraph X.X.X.”
16.4 FORMAT: Provides the required format of the data item to be prepared in response to this 
DRD. Applicable items providing format requirements may be referenced here or specific 
format requirements may be delineated. Applicable items should be referenced here, as 
appropriate, with specific application, i.e. “The data shall be prepared and submitted in 
accordance with YYY-STD-XXXX, Section X, paragraph X.X.X.” or “The data shall be 
prepared and submitted using Government-provided template YYY.YY.” “Contractor 
format is acceptable” should almost never be used—only if/when there is no specific
Government format required and only after it has been approved in advance by the 
Government.
16.5 MAINTENANCE: Indicates if and how the data item will be maintained current (e.g.
“Changes shall be incorporated by change page or complete reissue” for plans). If the data 
item is a recurring report, the maintenance statement will be “None required,” because 
reports are replaced by the next report submission. If the data item is a plan or specification 
that will be maintained current, the maintenance statement should be “Changes shall be 
incorporated by change page or complete reissue.”
17. Other items such as Related Data Deliverables may be added.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
20 of 217
A.3 TECHNICAL DATA PACKAGE (TDP)
DATA REQUIREMENTS DESCRIPTION (DRD)
1. DPD NO.: XXX 2. DPD STATUS: Draft 3. DRD NO.: STD-TDP
4. DATA TYPE: 2/3 5. DATE REVISED: 
6. PAGE: 1/7
7. TITLE: Technical Data Package (TDP)
8. DESCRIPTION/USE: The TDP consists of the technical description of an item suitable 
for use as the basis for engineering activities, competitive acquisition, production, 
installation, modification, operations, maintenance, and logistics support of Government 
material or property developed by or for the Government. The TDP defines the required 
design configuration (“as-designed” product configuration information), performance 
requirements, and procedures required to ensure an item’s performance. It consists of 
applicable digital technical data such as models, drawings, associated lists, specifications, 
standards, performance requirements, quality assurance provisions (QAPs), software, and 
memory device documentation and packaging/handling details. The TDP data are
ingested into the Government’s digital environment and serve as the basis for the asreceived (“as-sustained”) Product Baseline. This DRD relies heavily on DoD’s Technical 
Data Package standard (MIL-STD-31000) to provide requirements for the deliverable 
TDP data products and its related TDP data management products:
a. Conceptual TDP. A conceptual package is a collection of sketches, low fidelity 
computer-aided design (CAD) models, and text that document basic concepts of how 
an item may be developed to meet operational requirements. The TDP is used to 
determine if the requirements are feasible.
b. Developmental TDP. A developmental package is a collection of data intended to 
document a specific design approach and the fabrication of a developmental 
prototype for test or experimentation. These data elements capture the basic design of 
equipment/systems developed from a concept. They are not intended, nor are they 
adequate, for use in the competitive procurement of component parts.
c. Product TDP. A product package is a collection of product engineering data related to 
the design and manufacture of an item or system. Product drawings and/or CAD 
models contain all of the descriptive documentation needed to ensure the competitive 
procurement of spare parts or end items.
d. Commercial TDP. A commercial package is for end items developed by the 
Contractor prior to the award of the contract at his/her own expense. Unless the 
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
21 of 217
Government purchases rights for these drawings and/or CAD models, these data sets 
provide the Contractor's proprietary engineering and design information for 
commercially developed items, off-the-shelf items, or items not developed at 
Government expense.
(1) This DRD contains the format and content preparation instructions for TDPs
resulting from the work task described in MIL-STD-31000B, section 5.3.3.
(2) When this DRD is incorporated, in whole or in part, in a contract, DRDs 
applicable to individual parts of a TDP shall not be incorporated as separate 
requirements.
9. OPR: NASA Systems Engineering and Integration (SE&I) Office
10. DM: NASA Configuration Management Office
11. DISTRIBUTION: TBD
12. INITIAL SUBMISSION: Conceptual TDP - within thirty (30) days of contract award.
13. SUBMISSION FREQUENCY: Relative to each Major Milestone representing 
NPR 7120.5 life-cycle reviews, MIL-STD-31000, section 4.2 TDP levels (conceptual, 
developmental, production, and commercial) are leveraged to identify the level and type 
of data package. Interim submittals are to be made available per request up to ninety (90)
days prior to a scheduled delivery, with contracted deliveries due thirty (30) days prior to 
the respective Major Milestone.
a. Conceptual TDP. Initial due within thirty (30) days post contract award with updates 
due 30 days prior to System Requirements Review (SRR) and the System Definition
Review (SDR). Minimally annotated 3D models alone may be sufficient.
b. Developmental TDP. Due ninety (90) days prior to Preliminary Design Review
(PDR).
c. Product TDP. Due ninety (90) days prior to Critical Design Review (CDR).
d. Commercial TDP. Initial list of potential Contractor proprietary end items due thirty
(30) days post contract award for Government to identify and select potential 
procurement/data rights items. TDPs for selected items due thirty (30) days prior to 
PDR.
14. REMARKS: NASA will provide draft TDP delivery schedule and provide interim 
requests through the Contracting Officer’s Representative to the Contractor within ninety 
(90) days post contract award.
15. INTERRELATIONSHIPS:
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
22 of 217
15.1 DRDs (may include the following as specified):
a. DRD No. STD-MBx - Engineering Model-Based x “MBx” Models and Associated 
Data.
b. DRD No. STD-SDT - Specification and Drawing Trees.
c. DRD No. STD-EMDAL – Engineering Models, Drawings, and Associated Lists.
16. DATA PREPARATION INFORMATION:
16.1 SCOPE: TDPs contain the required data sets (CAD, analyses, etc., models, metadata, 
and supporting product configuration information) necessary to support the building of an 
integrated model set representing the program’s top level end items representing the 
integrated system.
16.2 APPLICABLE ITEM: 
MIL-STD-31000 Technical Data Packages
16.3 CONTENTS: The following items provide a technical description of the items 
necessary for supporting an acquisition, production, engineering, and logistics support 
(e.g. Engineering Data for Provisioning, Training, and Technical Manuals). TDPs contain 
multiple elements, described by levels and types, and typically have associated metadata 
and supplementary technical data. The description defines the required design 
configuration and/or performance requirements and procedures required to ensure 
adequacy of an item’s performance. It consists of applicable technical data such as 
models, drawings, associated lists, specifications, standards, performance requirements, 
QAPs, software documentation, and packaging details. The following contents shall be in 
accordance with the contract if specified—otherwise with MIL-STD-31000. (Note: 
Preparer should refer to MIL-STD-31000 for guidance, reference paragraph A.3, and 
utilize Figure 5 TDP Option Selection Worksheet [attached] as feasible).
16.3.1 REFERENCE DOCUMENTS. The applicable issue of the documents cited herein, 
including their approval dates and dates of any applicable amendments, notices, and 
revisions, shall be as specified in the contract.
16.3.2 CONTENT. The TDP shall include one or more of the following:
a. Conceptual design drawings/models in accordance with MIL-STD-31000B, section 
5.4.1.1.
b. Developmental design drawings/models and associated lists in accordance with MILSTD-31000B, section 5.4.1.2.
c. Product engineering design data and associated lists in accordance with MILSTD-31000B, section 5.4.1.3. The following shall be documented directly or by 
reference, as applicable:
(1) Details of unique processes, i.e. not published or generally available to industry, 
when essential to design and manufacture.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
23 of 217
(2) Performance ratings.
(3) Dimensional and tolerance data.
(4) Critical manufacturing processes and assemblysequences.
(5) Toleranced input and output characteristics.
(6) Diagrams.
(7) Mechanical and electrical connections.
(8) Physical characteristics, including form, finishes, and protective coatings.
(9) Details of material identification, including material condition and 
mandatory treatments and coatings.
(10) Inspection, test, and evaluation criteria.
(11) Equipment calibration requirements.
(12) Quality assurance requirements.
(13) Hardware marking requirements.
(14) Requirements for reliability, maintainability, environmental conditioning,
shock and vibration testing, and other operational or functional tests.
(15) Vendor substantiation data when required by the contract or purchase order.
(16) Requirements for programming software into devices or assemblies, including a
description of the input media and the procedures for validating that the 
software has been installed correctly.
(17) Special consideration items and processes.
d. Commercial drawings/models and associated lists in accordance with MIL-STD31000B, section 5.4.1.4.
e. Special inspection equipment (SIE) drawings/models and associated lists in 
accordance with MIL- STD-31000B, section 5.4.2.
f. Special tooling (ST) drawings/models and associated lists in accordance with MILSTD-31000B, section 5.4.3.
g. Specifications in accordance with MIL-STD-31000B, section 5.4.4.
h. Software documentation in accordance with MIL-STD-31000B, section 5.4.5.
i. Special packaging instruction (SPI) documents, drawings/models, and associated lists 
in accordance with MIL-STD-31000B, section 5.4.6.
j. Quality assurance provisions in accordance with MIL-STD-31000B, section 5.4.7.
k. Technical Data Package List (TDPL). A TDPL shall be prepared as an index to 
identify all content contained in the TDP. The TDPL format shall be as described in 
the contract but, as a minimum, shall list all content in the TDP by nomenclature, 
document number, CAGE code, document revision, and date.
16.4 FORMAT: The Contractor shall ensure that the following standards are implemented to 
sufficient conformance levels, including industry recommended practices:
a. ASME Y14.41, “Digital Product Definition Data Practices, Engineering Product 
Definition and Related Documentation Practices.”
b. ASME Y14.47, “Model Organization Practices - Engineering Product Definition and 
Related Documentation Practices.”
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
24 of 217
c. ISO 10303, Part 209, edition 2, “Industrial automation systems and integration -
Product data representation and exchange - Part 209: Application protocol:
Multidisciplinary analysis and design.”
d. ISO 10303-238, “Standard for the Exchange of Product (STEP) Model Data, PART 
238: Application interpreted model for computerized numeric controllers.”
e. ISO 10303-239, “Industrial automation systems and integration - Product data 
representation and exchange - Part 239: Application protocol: Product life-cycle 
Support.”
f. ISO 10303-242, “Industrial automation systems and integration – Product data 
representation and exchange – Part 242: Application protocol: Managed model-based 
3D engineering.”
Lightweight 3D CAD model representations shall be provided in one or more of the following:
a. ISO 10303-242, “Industrial automation systems and integration – Product data 
representation and exchange – Part 242: Application protocol: Managed model-based 
3D engineering.”
b. ISO 14306, “JT file format specification for 3D visualization.”
c. ISO 14739-1, “3D use of Product Representation Compact (PRC) format”
16.5 MAINTENANCE: Upon change/update post delivery and models upon request.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
25 of 217
Reference MIL-STD-31000B, Figure 5.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
26 of 217
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
27 of 217
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
28 of 217
A.4 ENGINEERING MODEL-BASED x (MBx) MODELS AND
ASSOCIATED DATA
DATA REQUIREMENTS DESCRIPTION (DRD)
1. DPD NO.: XXX 2. DPD STATUS: Draft 3. DRD NO.: STD-MBx
4. DATA TYPE: 3 5. DATE REVISED: 
6. PAGE: 1/3
7. TITLE: Engineering Model-Based x (MBx) Models and Associated Data
8. DESCRIPTION/USE: To provide engineering digital data utilizing model-based 
definitions (MBD) in a model-based enterprise (MBE) by defining the required design, 
analyses, and manufacturing models to the extent required to support integration of 
engineering, manufacturing, assembly/test, operations, maintenance, and sustaining 
functions of the integrated products and its systems. Engineering MBx models, data sets, 
and associated metadata shall be sufficient to build/assemble the detailed configuration of 
all deliverable system, subsystem, and component levels for given purpose (e.g. Digital 
Mock-up Unit [DMU], integrated Systems Modeling Language™ (SysML™) models, 
etc.) from the component to the fully integrated system. Computer-aided design (CAD), 
computer-aided engineering (CAE) (e.g. finite element method [FEM]/finite element 
analysis [FEA], SysML™, etc.), and computer-aided manufacturing (CAM) models shall 
be prepared and submitted in their agreed to standards and templates. An indentured 
Product Structure (PS) shall be submitted for each configuration item that graphically 
depicts the hierarchical structure of parts from the configuration item down to assemblies, 
subassemblies, and components.
9. OPR: Systems Engineering and Integration (SE&I)
10. DM: Configuration Management Office (CMO)
11. DISTRIBUTION: Per Contracting Officer's letter
12. INITIAL SUBMISSION: Thirty (30) days prior to Preliminary Design Review (PDR). 
Parts Marking Plan: 60 days after contract award.
13. SUBMISSION FREQUENCY: Four (4) weeks prior to each major review, as part of a 
Technical Data Package (TDP). In addition, MBx models, along with updated PS, shall 
be submitted between milestones as requested by the procuring activity for the related 
configuration items.
14. REMARKS: None
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
29 of 217
15. INTERRELATIONSHIPS:
ASME Y14.41 Digital Product Definition Data Practices
ASME Y14.47 Model Organization Practices
ISO 10303, Parts 233, Refer to Appendix K
 239, 242, etc.
16. DATA PREPARATION INFORMATION:
16.1 SCOPE: The Customer or designated Lead Systems Integrator (LSI) shall develop 
integrated model sets, assembling the various MBx model sets utilizing the agreed upon 
standards and formats.
16.2 APPLICABLE ITEMS: None.
16.3 CONTENTS: Refer to section 17.
16.4 FORMAT: Determined by specific program/project/activity.
16.5 MAINTENANCE: Refer to section 17.
17. DATA DELIVERABLES:
17.1 The Supplier shall deliver:
17.1.1 Their integrated MBx models representing Contractor’s deliverable end items—
system and assembly models identifying changes since prior submittal.
17.1.2 The integrated system DMU assembly model shall be an independent model that 
combines elements from the installation model and the Contractor’s end item models.
17.1.2.1 The integrated system, subsystem, or element top assembly DMU model shall not 
contain simplified model representations.
17.1.2.2 The integrated system of systems DMU (highest level assembly) model shall use 
a common skeleton structure definition for placement of major elements and their 
derivative model representations, i.e. a simplified representation.
17.1.3 Simplified representations of the Contractor’s system top assemblies and primary 
integrated ground support equipment (GSE) with the integrated element, if created.
17.1.3.1 A simplified representation is not a Creo Parametric™ (or other CAD) native 
simple representation (however, these may be created from a simple 
representation) but is an accurate single surface, water-tight contiguous body 
representing the nominal “as-designed” configuration or structure.
17.1.3.2 A simplified representation used for space and weight shall determine weight and 
center of gravity (cg), either as computed or assigned.
17.1.3.3 Keep-out zones and other volume simulators shall be separate models located per 
the common skeleton structure.
17.1.4 A light-weight viewable derived from the integrated top assembly model set.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
30 of 217
17.1.4.1 A light-weight viewable is a CAD-derived product that is used to view CAD 
graphical data with a standard personal computer and Web downloadable 
software. Light-weight viewables can be used by those with little or no CAD 
experience and/or without access to CAD software/licenses. Light-weight 
viewable files shall contain approximate (faceted) data, exact boundary 
representation surfaces (non-uniform rational basis spline [NURBS]), product and 
limited part manufacturing information (PMI), and metadata.
17.1.4.2 Light-weight viewables shall be delivered in formats such as 3D portable 
document format (PDF) and/or Jupiter Tessellation (JT) in addition to the native 
3D CAD.
17.2 All associated models used in the assembly model.
17.3 Creo Parametric™-driven drawings and drawing files of the design/modifications 
suitable for a construction fabricator.
18. Subsystem model assemblies (i.e. fluid panels, enclosures, umbilicals, etc.) will be 
provided to the architect and engineer (A&E).
19. The A&E shall deliver:
19.1 Modified assemblies in the same format as they were received.
19.2 Simplified representation of the base structure, tower levels, and primary integrated GSE 
with the integrated mobile launcher assembly, if created.
19.2.1 A simplified representation is not a Creo Parametric™ simple representation 
(however, it may be created from a simple representation) but is an accurate single 
surface, water-tight contiguous body representing the nominal “as-designed” 
configuration or structure. 
19.2.2 A simplified representation used for space and weight shall determine weight and cg, 
either as computed or assigned.
19.2.3 Keep-out zones and other volume simulators shall be separate models located per the 
common skeleton structure.
19.3 A light-weight viewable derived from the integrated mobile launcher assembly model.
19.3.1 A light-weight viewable is a CAD-derived product that is used to view CAD 
graphical data with a standard personal computer and Web downloadable software
(e.g. 3Di format derived from the 3D native models (specify type, i.e. JT ISO 14306, 
Industrial automation systems and integration -- JT file format specification for 3D 
visualization; 3D PDF, ISO 32000-1, Document management – Portable document 
format – Part 1: PDF 1.7; etc. Light-weight viewables can be used by those with little 
or no CAD experience and/or without access to CAD software/licenses.
19.4 An interface detail product (IDP).
19.4.1 By definition, the IDP contains only the CAD files necessary to construct the 
interface control document (ICD) views. The IDP CAD dataset should be located in 
vehicle or element coordinates. 
19.4.2 An ICD should be as generic as possible. To the extent possible, an IDP should not 
reflect “background detail” that is subject to change.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
31 of 217
19.5 Provide a reference document detailing any name changes (i.e. “WAS”, “IS”) if 
necessary.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
32 of 217
A.5 CONFIGURATION AND DATA MANAGEMENT PROCESS AUDIT
(CDMPA)
DATA REQUIREMENTS DESCRIPTION (DRD)
1. DPD NO.: XXX 2. DPD STATUS: Draft 3. DRD NO.: STD-CDMPA
4. DATA TYPE: 3 5. DATE REVISED: 
6. PAGE: 1/2
7. TITLE: Configuration and Data Management Process Audit (CDMPA)
8. DESCRIPTION/USE: To ensure that the Supplier’s organization is compliant with the 
configuration management (CM) requirements of the contract and that the configuration 
baselines are correctly defined, controlled, accounted for, and verified, and any required 
corrective actions resulting from the audit are implemented.
9. OPR: [Enter Agency organization with technical responsibility for the supported data.]
10. DM: [Enter Agency organization acquiring the data for a specific 
program/project/activity.]
11. DISTRIBUTION: Per Contracting Officer's letter.
12. INITIAL SUBMISSION: Per program/project/activity in contract; otherwise, within 
thirty (30) days of Supplier’s Configuration and Data Management Plan (DRD No. STDCDMP) delivery.
13. SUBMISSION FREQUENCY: Per NASA/Supplier jointly approved audit plan.
14. REMARKS: None
15. INTERRELATIONSHIP: None
16. DATA PREPARATION INFORMATION:
16.1 SCOPE: The CDMPA will ensure that the audited organization is compliant with the
Configuration and Data Management (CDM) requirements of the project.
16.2 APPLICABLE ITEMS:
Program/Project/Activity-specific CDM Process Audit Plan
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
33 of 217
16.3 CONTENTS: The CDMPA is a joint NASA/Supplier activity that is conducted to verify 
the adequacy of the Supplier’s implementation and execution of CDM requirements and 
identify areas that need correction or improvements. The Supplier shall provide data to 
support the CDMPA as defined in the Program/Project/Activity-specific Audit Plan,
including the following:
a. Configuration and Data Management Plan.
b. Configuration Status Accounting Reports.
c. Deviation and Waiver Approval Requests.
d. Engineering Models, Drawings, and Associated Lists.
e. Engineering/Project Change Proposals.
f. Release Records.
g. Manufacturing Records (including WADs, NCs, Open Work items, etc.).
h. Acceptance Data Package Documentation.
i. Functional Configuration Audit/Physical Configuration Audit (FCA/PCA) Review 
Findings.
j. Agenda.
k. Presentation Charts.
l. Supplier Self-Assessment Results.
m. Minutes.
n. Findings (Generated at Reviews).
o. Follow-up Closure Status.
16.4 FORMAT: NASA-approved supplier format is acceptable.
16.5 MAINTENANCE: Discrepancies found during the audit shall be documented as 
Findings Observations, or equivalent, and corrective action assigned for each finding. 
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
34 of 217
A.6 CONFIGURATION AND DATA MANAGEMENT PLAN (CDMP)
DATA REQUIREMENTS DESCRIPTION (DRD)
1. DPD NO.: XXX 2. DPD STATUS: Draft 3. DRD NO.: STD-CDMP
4. DATA TYPE: 1 5. DATE REVISED: 
6. PAGE: 1/4
7. TITLE: Configuration and Data Management Plan (CDMP)
8. DESCRIPTION/USE: To describe the approach for accomplishing how the Supplier 
shall implement configuration and data management requirements into plans, processes, 
and procedures in compliance with the overall Agency, program, and project’s 
requirements, policies, and procedures and address configuration and data management 
planning and organization, configuration identification, configuration control and 
interface management, configuration status accounting, and configuration verification 
and audits along with their correlating data access controls/security, etc.
9. OPR: NASA Configuration Management Office (CMO) or their Representative
10. DM: NASA Data Management Office (DMO) or their Representative
11. DISTRIBUTION: Per Contracting Officer's letter
12. INITIAL SUBMISSION: Submit ninety (90) days post contract award.
13. SUBMISSION FREQUENCY: Submit annual updates as well as necessary submittals 
due to contract changes.
14. REMARKS: None
15. INTERRELATIONSHIP: All related configuration and data management (CDM)
scope and DRDs.
16. DATA PREPARATION INFORMATION:
16.1 SCOPE: The CDMP will identify how the Supplier will implement CDM to provide 
consistency among the product requirements, product configuration information (PCI), and the 
product throughout the applicable phases of the product life cycle. The CDMP reflects the 
supplier’s planned application of the CDM principles and practices to the Government’s 
identified product context and environment. The CDMP and its sub-tiered policies, processes, and 
procedures shall define the supplier’s entire collective CDM processes and enable CDM Process 
Audits (e.g. STD-CDMPA).
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
35 of 217
16.2 APPLICABLE ITEMS:
SAE GEIA-859 Data Management
SAE EIA-649 Configuration Management Standard
SAE EIA-649-2 Configuration Management Requirements for NASA Enterprises
16.3 CONTENTS: The CDMP shall define and explain how the Supplier implements a CDM 
Program to meet the requirements of GEIA-859, SAE EIA-649, and SAE EIA-649-2, 
including the following:
16.3.1 Configuration Management Planning and Organization:
16.3.1.1 Purpose and Scope:
16.3.1.1.1 The purpose and objectives shall be stated along with a brief description of the 
Supplier’s management policy and methods as applied to the CDM Program.
16.3.1.1.2 A brief description of the system or system products, including the top-level 
hardware, software, etc., with lower level component Configuration Items (CIs) 
for which the supplier is responsible to supply the Government and to which the
CDMP pertains.
16.3.1.1.3 Any applicable limitations and assumptions (e.g. time constraints, known risks, 
customer participation level, resource availability, etc.) that may impact the 
supplier’s ability to perform the defined CDM activities or impact the proposed 
budget and/or schedule shall be identified.
16.3.1.1.4 The Supplier shall describe the persons, boards, and groups within and external to 
the Supplier’s organization having decisional authority over the planning, 
implementation, and execution of the CDMP.
16.3.1.1.5 Applicable and reference documents. All specifications, standards, manuals, and 
other documents, including policy directives, shall be specified in the plan by 
title, document number, revision, issuing authority, and when applicable, change 
notice, amendment number, and date of issue. All applicable CDM-related 
documents (e.g. separate software and sub-supplier CDMPs, risk management 
plans, etc.) and their interrelationships shall be identified and listed in the plan by 
title, number, issuing authority, and when applicable, revision, change notice, 
amendment number, and date of issue.
16.3.1.2 Organization: Describe and graphically illustrate the organizational context within 
which the planned CDM activities are to be implemented, including:
16.3.1.2.1 All organizations, whether internal or external to the Supplier’s organization, that 
will participate in or are responsible for any CDM activity.
16.3.1.2.2 Responsibility and authority for CDM and all participating groups and 
organizations, including their roles in Configuration Control Boards (CCBs).
16.3.1.2.3 Description of the Supplier’s CDM organization to include how CDM
responsibilities are to be allocated and any unique qualifications or training 
methods and materials required.
16.3.1.2.4 The organizational interface points for both the hardware and the software 
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
36 of 217
products and the interfaces required to implement these relationships.
16.3.1.2.5 The functional integration of CDM activities into other program activities such as 
technical, management, and design reviews.
16.3.1.3 Configuration Identification:
16.3.1.3.1 List of CIs and computer software configuration items (CSCIs) managed under 
this CDMP and the criteria for the establishment of CIs and CSCIs.
16.3.1.3.2 Establishment and management of product configuration items (PCIs).
16.3.1.3.3 Establishment of configuration baselines (functional, allocated, and product) and 
definition of the configuration documentation required for each, including graphic 
illustration of configuration documentation relationships and describe any other
baselines that are required to be tracked by CDM.
16.3.1.3.4 Assignment, application, and control of unique identifiers for each PCI and 
revisions.
16.3.1.3.5 Identification of release procedures for PCI.
16.3.1.4 Configuration Control and Interface Management:
16.3.1.4.1 Organization, functions, responsibility, and authority of the CCBs.
16.3.1.4.2 Identification of the membership roles for each authorized CCB.
16.3.1.4.3 Classification of changes and the level of authority for change disposition.
16.3.1.4.4 Identification of procedures for processing different types of changes such as 
Request for Change, Request for Variance, Field Engineering Changes, 
modification kit authorization, issuance, and tracking and include processes and 
responsibilities for receiving, recording, evaluating, distributing, and maintaining 
changes through implementation and closure.
16.3.1.4.5 Identification of the interrelationship between any Interface Working Groups and 
the configuration control process.
16.3.1.4.6 Identification of the interrelationship between the nonconformance disposition 
process and the change management process.
16.3.1.5 Configuration Status Accounting:
16.3.1.5.1 Methods for collecting, recording, processing, maintaining, and safeguarding data 
necessary to provide the status accounting information via reports and/or database 
access.
16.3.1.5.2 Description of the content and formation for all configuration accounting reports 
or information system content as related to the identified data elements including:
16.3.1.5.2.1 Identification of currently approved PCI and configuration identifiers 
associated with each CI.
16.3.1.5.2.2 Status of request for change from initiation to implementation.
16.3.1.5.2.3 Request for Variance.
16.3.1.5.2.4 Traceability of changes to released document through implementation.
16.3.1.5.2.5 Results of configuration audit; status and disposition of discrepancies.
16.3.1.5.2.6 Effectivity and installation status of approved configuration changes to all CIs 
at all locations.
16.3.1.5.2.7 Methods of access to information in status accounting systems and/or 
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
37 of 217
frequency of reporting and distribution.
16.3.1.6 Configuration Verification and Audits:
16.3.1.6.1 Plans, procedures, documentation, and schedules for functional and physical 
configuration audits.
16.3.1.6.2 Plans, procedures, documentation, and schedules for conducting CDM system 
audits and reporting results and to define the expectations and responsibilities of 
organizations in sufficient detail to allow for planning and funding.
16.3.1.6.3 Plans, procedures, and schedules for reviews necessary for the establishment of 
functional, allocated, and product baselines.
16.3.1.6.4 Description of the format for audit reports and the method for tracking status and 
disposition of discrepancies.
16.3.1.7 Configuration data management shall describe the methods for meeting the CDM
technical data requirements under the computer-aided transmission and distribution 
requirements for the project. The following lists areas, but not necessarily all of the 
areas, to be considered when addressing this subject in the CDMP:
16.3.1.7.1 How data deliverables, including CDM identification data and changes, are 
delivered, verified, stored, and maintained.
16.3.1.7.2 How data is processed and the type of records, hardcopy or digital.
16.3.1.7.3 How sensitive but unclassified (SBU) and limited rights information is protected.
16.3.1.7.4 Method of notification/acknowledgement of receipt, return, or acceptance.
16.3.1.7.5 Indication of time constraints, if any, or automatic data acceptance.
16.3.1.7.6 Data status accounting.
16.3.1.7.7 How data is accessed.
16.3.1.7.8 Methods of indicating acceptance, provisional acceptance, approval, or rejection, 
as applicable.
16.3.1.8 Records: Identify and maintain CDM-related records.
16.4 FORMAT: CDMP template available from the Government; supplier format accepted 
upon approval by the Government.
16.5 MAINTENANCE: Changes shall be incorporated by complete revision/reissue and 
submitted at least annually.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
38 of 217
A.7 CONFIGURATION STATUS ACCOUNTING (CSA)
DATA REQUIREMENTS DESCRIPTION (DRD)
1. DPD NO.: XXX 2. DPD STATUS: Draft 3. DRD NO.: STD-CSA
4. DATA TYPE: 3 5. DATE REVISED: 
6. PAGE: 1/3
7. TITLE: Configuration Status Accounting (CSA)
8. DESCRIPTION/USE: To provide accurate and timely information concerning a 
product and its product configuration information throughout the product life cycle.
9. OPR: Configuration Management Office (CMO)
10. DM: [Enter Agency organization acquiring the data for a specific 
program/project/activity.]
11. DISTRIBUTION: Per Contracting Officer's letter
12. INITIAL SUBMISSION: Three (3) weeks prior to Preliminary Design Review (PDR)
13. SUBMISSION FREQUENCY: At major design reviews and configuration audits, and 
as requested
14. REMARKS: None
15. INTERRELATIONSHIP: 
DRD No. STD-CDMP
16. DATA PREPARATION INFORMATION: 
16.1 SCOPE: The CSA will provide a status of configuration baseline changes and recording 
of accurate and timely product configuration information that will be captured as it is 
created over the product life cycle.
16.2 APPLICABLE ITEMS: 
SAE EIA-649 Configuration Management Standard
SAE EIA-649-2 Configuration Management Requirements for NASA Enterprises
16.3 CONTENTS: The CSA shall meet the requirements of SAE EIA-649 and SAE EIA649-2. The supplier shall provide the following reports as required by the contract:
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
39 of 217
a. Dispositioned Change Activity Report shall list all proposed changes, including 
variances that have been received and Customer disposition action, arranged in a 
change proposal number sequence. The following data elements shall be included:
(1) Identification of the change proposal, including the basic number, revision level, 
title, and associated change package number.
(2) Identification of the configuration item (CI) affected, including the number, 
nomenclature, and CI effectivity by serial number(s).
(3) Identification of contractual change authorization, including number and date.
(4) Disposition of the change proposal, i.e. “Approved”, “Approved with Changes”, 
or “Disapproved”.
(5) Identification and date of Supplier's internal authorization documentation.
b. Pending Change Activity Report shall list all change requests that are pending, either 
for internal Supplier approval or Customer approval, and shall be arranged in a 
change proposal number sequence. The following data elements shall be included:
(1) Identification of the change action, including the basic number, revision level, 
title, and associated change package number.
(2) Identification of the CI affected, including number, nomenclature, and CI 
effectivity by serial number(s).
(3) Depending on the processing status, enter the actual or estimated date of submittal 
to the Customer.
c. Configuration Identification Report shall identify the baseline configuration and all 
configuration change actions for each CI. Hardware and software changes shall be 
listed separately from Variance Request (VR) actions. The following data elements 
shall be included:
(1) Contract and Contractor identification.
(2) CI identification, including, as appropriate, CI number and nomenclature, part 
number, and specification number.
(3) Configuration change data, including the following:
A. Change proposal identification, including type of action (e.g. Change Request 
[CR] or VR), number, title, and associated change package number (if 
applicable).
B. Change application, including item(s) affected (e.g. hardware, software, or 
documentation), first and total effectivities, and the incorporation or 
installation points.
C. Change disposition, including the identification of contractual change 
authorization.
d. Change Incorporation Status Report shall list the status of CR incorporation into CIs 
and shall be organized by CI number. The following data elements shall be included:
(1) CI identification number and serial number.
(2) CR number, title, type of change, and associated change package number.
(3) Change effectivity, engineering release date, and incorporation point.
(4) In-line incorporation completion date, scheduled and actual, as appropriate.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
40 of 217
(5) Mod Kit data shall include identification, authorization, effectivity, man-hour 
estimates and status, installation location, shipping date (scheduled and actual), 
and completion date(s) for installation and retest, if required.
e. As-designed/As-built Comparison Report describes the differences between the asdesigned and as-built configurations.
f. Software CSA Reports shall provide reports as follows:
(1) Released documentation, including specifications and interface information.
(2) Problem reporting, deviation/waiver activity, including dispositions and open 
actions.
(3) Promotion tracking of code for each file through development, testing, 
validation/verification, and operational deployment.
(4) Build records and version control – provide data for the Version Description 
Document (VDD).
16.4 FORMAT: Supplier format is acceptable provided the requirements of SAE EIA-649-2 
are addressed for each report.
16.5 MAINTENANCE: None required
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
41 of 217
A.8 SPECIFICATION AND DRAWING TREES (SDT)
DATA REQUIREMENTS DESCRIPTION (DRD)
1. DPD NO.: XXX 2. DPD STATUS: Draft 3. DRD NO.: STD-SDT
4. DATA TYPE: 3 5. DATE REVISED: 
6. PAGE: 1/2
7. TITLE: Specification and Drawing Trees (SDT)
8. DESCRIPTION/USE: A specification tree is a generation breakdown of the 
specifications with interrelationships, as applicable, to the configuration items. A 
drawing tree is a generation breakdown of the engineering drawings that depicts the 
allocation of requirements of the configuration item specification.
9. OPR: [Enter Agency organization with technical responsibility for the supported data.]
10. DM: [Enter Agency organization acquiring the data for a specific 
program/project/activity.]
11. DISTRIBUTION: Per Contracting Officer's letter
12. INITIAL SUBMISSION: Specification trees - Three (3) weeks prior to Preliminary 
Design Review (PDR). Drawing trees - Three (3) weeks prior to Critical Design Review 
(CDR).
13. SUBMISSION FREQUENCY: Specification tree updated for CDR; specification and 
drawing trees updated for the Physical Configuration Audits (PCA).
14. REMARKS: None
15. INTERRELATIONSHIP: None
16. DATA PREPARATION INFORMATION:
16.1 SCOPE: SDTs depict the hardware and software configuration items in top down, or 
generation breakdown, form.
16.2 APPLICABLE ITEMS: None
16.3 CONTENTS: The SDTs shall consist of an indentured or generation breakdown listing 
of all specifications or drawings applicable to a configuration item or items.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
42 of 217
16.4 FORMAT: Contractor format is acceptable upon Government approval.
16.5 MAINTENANCE: Changes shall be incorporated by complete reissue.
NOTE to STD-SDT
Sample Statement of Work Words:
Specification and Drawing Trees. Specification and drawing trees shall be provided in 
accordance with DRD No. STD-SDT.
NOTE:
These instructions on DRD applicability are not a part of the DRD 
and should not be included in a DPD.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
43 of 217
A.9 ENGINEERING MODELS, DRAWINGS, AND ASSOCIATED LISTS
(EMDAL)
DATA REQUIREMENTS DESCRIPTION (DRD)
1. DPD NO.: XXX 2. DPD STATUS: Draft 3. DRD NO.: STD/EMDAL
4. DATA TYPE: 3 5. DATE REVISED: 
6. PAGE: 1/4
7. TITLE: Engineering Models, Drawings, and Associated Lists (EMDAL)
8. DESCRIPTION/USE: To provide engineering data defining the design to the extent 
required to support manufacturing, test, and logistics support of the vehicle and payload 
systems and required spare parts. EMDALs shall be sufficient to depict the detailed 
configuration of all system, subsystem, and component levels and to include ground 
support equipment (GSE), electrical ground support equipment (EGSE), and ancillary 
support equipment (ASE). Two (2)D and 3D computer-aided design (CAD) models shall 
be submitted as primary information. A Product Breakdown Structure and drawing tree 
shall be submitted for each configuration item that graphically depicts the hierarchical 
structure of all parts (components, assemblies, etc.) from the top-level configuration item 
down to assemblies, subassemblies, and components.
9. OPR: NASA Configuration Management Office (CMO) or their Representative
10. DM: NASA Data Management Office (DMO) or their Representative
11. DISTRIBUTION: Per Contracting Officer's letter
12. INITIAL SUBMISSION: Three (3) weeks prior to Preliminary Design Review (PDR).
13. SUBMISSION FREQUENCY: Three (3) weeks prior to each major review, as part of a 
Technical Data Package (TDP), and as requested. In addition, 3D CAD models shall be 
submitted between milestones as requested by the procuring activity; and updated 
Product Structure and/or Drawing Trees shall be submitted for the related configuration 
items’ Physical Configuration Audit (PCA).
14. REMARKS: 
15. INTERRELATIONSHIP: 
DRD-TDP
DRD-MRI
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
44 of 217
16. DATA PREPARATION INFORMATION:
16.1 SCOPE: EMDALs disclose (directly or by reference) the physical and functional 
requirements of an item by means of graphics or textual presentation or combinations of 
both, as implemented by 3D models. Product Structure Reports and Drawing Trees depict 
the hardware and software configuration items in graphic, top down, hierarchical 
structures.
16.2 APPLICABLE ITEMS:
Global Drawing Requirements Manual (GDRM) (Tenth Edition)
ASME Y14.5 Dimensioning and Tolerancing 
ASME Y14.100 Engineering Drawing Practices
ASME Y14.24 Types and Applications of Engineering Drawings
ASME Y14.34 Associated Lists
ASME Y14.41 Digital Product Definition Data Practices
 ASME Y14.47 Model Organization Practices
MIL-STD-130 Department of Defense Standard Practices, Identification Marking
of U.S. Military Property
16.3 CONTENTS: EMDAL requirements shall include: 
16.3.1 Part I – Engineering models, drawings, analyses, and associated lists shall meet the 
requirements of ASME Y14.100. Geometric dimensioning and tolerancing shall be 
implemented in accordance with ASME Y14.5. Supplemental 2D/3D CAD shall meet the 
requirements of ASME Y14.41 and ASME Y14.47. EMDALs of end items, elements,
and/or all components and assemblies shall be provided to define the details necessary for 
the manufacture, test, inspection, operations, and logistic support of the system. This 
definition shall:
a. Reflect the end-product at its current level of design maturity.
b. Provide the engineering data for logistics support products.
c. Provide the necessary data to permit manufacture and/or acquisition of items identical 
to the original item(s).
16.3.2 Document directly or by reference the following:
a. Details of unique processes (i.e. not published or generally available to industry) 
when essential to design and manufacture.
b. Performance ratings.
c. Dimensional and tolerance data (geometric dimensioning and tolerancing [GD&T] 
for all external and major internal interfaces shall have GD&T applied.)
d. Critical manufacturing processes and assembly sequences, and rigging procedures.
e. Diagrams.
f. Mechanical and electrical connections.
g. Physical characteristics, including form and finish.
h. Details of material identification, including heat treatment and protective coatings.
i. Inspection, test, and evaluation criteria.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
45 of 217
j. Equipment calibration requirements.
k. Quality assurance requirements.
l. Hardware marking requirements.
m. Requirements for reliability, maintainability, environmental conditions, shock, 
vibration testing, and other operational or functional tests.
16.3.3 Limited rights-in-data items - Engineering data for items that the Government does not 
have unlimited rights in data shall specify the form, fit, and function requirements of the 
item and conform to the requirements for a control drawing as defined in ASME Y14.100 
or a specification prepared in accordance with project requirements.
16.3.4 Part II - Cable interconnect diagrams (CIDs), electrical system schematics, cable harness 
assembly models/drawings, and wiring lists. Cable interconnect diagrams, electrical 
system schematics, cable harness assembly models/drawings, wiring lists, and fluid 
system schematics shall be prepared in accordance with ASME Y14.100. Part I 
models/drawings shall be utilized to the maximum extent possible in providing the design 
definition. The models/drawings shall include the following:
a. Cable interconnect diagrams shall show graphically the arrangement of external 
electrical cabling that interconnects electrical assemblies and/or equipment. The CID 
shall show all cable runs and terminations; each cable shall be identified by reference 
designation number. The connector short sign shall be identified. 
b. Electrical system schematics shall illustrate and describe circuit items with symbols 
placed such that a circuit may be traced from item to item in the sequence of its 
function. The placement and arrangement of these circuits shall follow a logical 
sequence of presentation to provide a clear description of the distribution.
c. Cable harness assembly models/drawings shall meet the requirements of Global 
Drawing Requirements Manual (10th edition) and ASME Y14.24.
d. Component Level Documentation - Schematics and/or wiring lists for components, 
including interconnecting cable harnesses, shall be provided.
e. Overall Grounding Documentation - The grounding schematic shall show the details 
of all grounds and power returns from source to loads. All connections shall be 
shown. It shall also show details of all EGSE interconnections to facility and safety 
grounds. Grounding schematics shall meet the requirements of Global Drawing 
Requirements Manual (10th Edition).
f. The fluid system schematic shall illustrate and describe all components with symbols 
and flow designators such that the fluid system may be traced from component to 
component (such as pumps, valves, meters, regulators, and filters). The schematics 
shall document the range requirements (flow, temperature, and pressure) for all 
component external interfaces and line sizes. The placement and arrangement of these 
components shall follow a logical sequence of presentation to provide a clear 
description of the flow of fluids in the system. The schematics shall reference 
EMDALs for configuration details.
g. Engineering models/drawings shall specify marking criteria and methods for 
identification of parts produced or procured. Markings shall be compliant with MIL-
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
46 of 217
STD-130 with compliant unique identification marking (UID)/item unique 
identification (IUID) 2D codes. All parts shall be physically marked. When physical 
marking or tagging causes a deleterious effect, labels, tags, and nameplates may be 
considered. MIL-STD-130 shall be used for paper labels, tagging, and nameplates.
h. A Product Breakdown Structure and drawing tree shall be submitted for each 
configuration item that graphically depicts the hierarchical structure of drawings/parts
from the configuration item down to assemblies, subassemblies, and components.
16.4 FORMAT: Format for engineering CAD models shall be in accordance with ASME 
Y14.41 and ASME Y14.47 and delivered in Government’s specified native and neutral 
formats. Format of engineering drawings shall be in accordance with ASME Y14.100. In 
addition, formats for electrical engineering drawings shall be in accordance with Global 
Drawing Requirements Manual (10th Edition). All drawings shall be delivered in native 
CAD, machine-readable portable document format (PDF), and agreed to neutral formats. 
Additionally, any native file formats used to create the PDF drawings shall be delivered 
(e.g., *.VSD or *.DWG). Two (2)D/3D CAD models shall be in accordance with ASME 
Y14.41/ASME Y.14.47, in the current version of native-developed CAD, fully parametric 
and associative. Native format and machine-readable PDFs are acceptable for drawing 
trees. The Contractor shall deliver Creo Parametric™ compatible 3D models of the 
components. Alternate formats may be acceptable upon negotiation. All 
documentation/data shall include the Contractor's CAGE code and document numbers. 
The Contractor may submit electronic files of drawings and CAD models via compact 
disc (CD), digital versatile disc (DVD), or direct electronic transfer (product data 
management [PDM] Tool, file transfer protocol [FTP], etc.) as specified by the 
Government.
16.4.1For all electronic deliveries, the Contractor shall include a listing of the creating 
environment to include the following:
a. CAD product name/version/patches.
b. Subordinate (plug-in) software/version/patches.
c. Description of hardware (e.g. minimum/desired requirements for central processing 
unit (CPU), graphics processing unit (GPU), random access memory (RAM), storage, 
etc.)
d. Operating system/version/patches.
16.5 MAINTENANCE: All documents produced under this DRD shall be maintained 
current. Changes to and/or updating of engineering models, drawings, associated lists, 
product structures, and drawing trees shall be in accordance with the Contractor's 
approved drawing system and the provisions herein. Changes to engineering drawings 
under the Government's Class I change control shall be submitted by Engineering Change 
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
47 of 217
Proposal. The Contractor shall maintain the capability to restore and modify any 
engineering data used in the design throughout the project life cycle.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
48 of 217
A.10 CHANGE REQUEST (CR)
DATA REQUIREMENTS DESCRIPTION (DRD)
1. DPD NO.: XXX 2. DPD STATUS: Draft 3. DRD NO.: STD-CR
4. DATA TYPE: 1 5. DATE REVISED: 
6. PAGE: 1/2
7. TITLE: Change Request (CR)
8. DESCRIPTION/USE: To process and submit proposed engineering changes for 
evaluation and disposition by the appropriate Configuration Approval Authority.
9. OPR: NASA Configuration Management Organization (CMO)
10. DM: NASA CMO
11: DISTRIBUTION: Per Contract Schedule
12. INITIAL SUBMISSION: Per Contract Schedule
13. SUBMISSION FREQUENCY: As required
14. REMARKS: None
15. INTERRELATIONSHIP: None
16. DATA PREPARATION INFORMATION:
16.1 SCOPE: The Change Request (CR) will document information by which a change is 
proposed, described, justified, and submitted with impact assessment to the Approval 
Authority.
16.2 APPLICABLE ITEMS: 
SAE EIA-649-2, Configuration Management Requirements for NASA Enterprises.
16.3 CONTENTS: The CR shall document a proposed engineering change meeting the 
requirements of SAE EIA-649-2 and contain the following minimum information: 
a. CR number,
b. CR revision-version,
c. Creation date,
d. CR title,
e. Change package number,
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
49 of 217
f. Originator name,
g. Originator company and organization code,
h. Commercial and Government Entity (CAGE) code required for Contractor or external 
agreement,
i. Contact or agreement number required for Contractor or external agreement,
j. Recommended priority: routine, urgent, or emergency,
k. Change description,
l. Change classification,
m. Change type (hardware, software, or documentation),
n. Impacts (cost, schedule, risk, and technical),
o. Justification or reason for change,
p. Programs and projects affected,
q. Affected baselines, documents, and data,
r. Affected configuration item(s) and effectivity,
s. Modification Kit information (if required),
t. The following information is recommended for inclusion: Related MBx models/data 
(per DRD No. STD-MBx); schedule need dates; originator’s e-mail and telephone; 
sensitive but unclassified (SBU) restrictions; consequences if not incorporated; 
Contracting Officer; office of primary responsibility (OPR); owning Center; and 
authorization to submit/initiate document number.
16.4 FORMAT: Agreed-to supplier format is acceptable as long as it meets the content 
requirements of paragraph 16.3.
16.5 MAINTENANCE: All requested CR changes require submittal of a CR revision.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
50 of 217
A.11 FUNCTIONAL CONFIGURATION AUDIT AND PHYSICAL 
CONFIGURATION AUDIT (FCA/PCA) DOCUMENTATION (AD)
DATA REQUIREMENTS DESCRIPTION (DRD)
1. DPD NO.: XXX 2. DPD STATUS: Draft 3. DRD NO.: STD-AD
4. DATA TYPE: 2/3 5. DATE REVISED:
6. PAGE: 1/6
7. TITLE: Functional Configuration Audit and Physical Configuration Audit (FCA/PCA) 
Documentation (AD)
8. DESCRIPTION/USE: To support the Functional Configuration Audit (FCA) and 
Physical Configuration Audit (PCA). The FCA is an audit to verify performance of the 
configuration item (CI)/computer software configuration item (CSCI) against approved 
configuration documentation. The PCA is an audit of the configuration documentation 
and quality control records to ensure the “as-built” configuration complies with the “asdesigned” configuration defined in the documentation.
9. OPR: [Enter Agency organization with technical responsibility for the supported data.]
10. DM: [Enter Agency organization acquiring the data for a specific 
program/project/activity.]
11. DISTRIBUTION: See Attachment 2.
12. INITIAL SUBMISSION: See Attachment 2.
13. SUBMISSION FREQUENCY: Per configuration audit schedule.
14. REMARKS: NASA will document audit details and schedule and provide it to the 
Contractor within ninety (90) days post award.
15. INTERRELATIONSHIP: None
16. DATA PREPARATION INFORMATION:
16.1 SCOPE: FCA/PCA documentation contains the required documentation necessary to 
support the configuration audit for a CI and a CSCI.
16.2 APPLICABLE ITEMS:
SAE/EIA-649-2 Configuration Management Requirements for NASA Enterprises
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
51 of 217
16.3 CONTENTS: Requirements specifications, verification planning documentation, and 
other required data for the FCA shall be that collected for the CI/CSCI that is to be 
formally accepted. The PCA verifies that the “as-built” configuration reflects the required 
characteristics documented in the “as-designed” configuration. Configuration and quality 
control records and other documents defining the “as-built” or “as-coded” configuration 
defined in the documentation shall be provided.
SAE/EIA-649-2 provides guidelines on documentation required for the FCA and PCA. 
See Attachment 1 for documentation required for the audits.
Additional documentation requirements to be provided are:
a. Agenda—The agenda shall specify the date, time, and place for the scheduled audit, 
specific review items, supporting documentation, and key participants. Submit 
approved copies at the review. See Attachment 2.
b. Presentation Charts—Presentation charts shall be submitted at the start of the audit.
They shall summarize the details contained in the data package and identify 
compliance with the contract requirements. See Attachment 2 for distribution and 
availability of data.
c. Plan—A plan shall be submitted prior to initiating the audit stating configuration 
items to be reviewed, data required to perform the review, how audit action items are 
recorded and tracked, defining success criteria, and providing for formal approval of 
the audit. The plan shall also define extent of Contractor and Government 
participation in the review.
d. Audit Minutes Package—The official Audit Minutes Package (not to be confused 
with the daily audit minutes) shall contain a description of the audit with sufficient 
detail to enable the audit to be made a matter of record. The Audit Minutes Package 
shall include the presentation charts, a listing of Findings, audit action items 
identified with actionee and suspense data, approved FCA/PCA certification sheets, 
any daily audit minutes, and any record of other findings, conclusions, and 
recommendations as applicable. See Attachment 2 for distribution and availability of 
data. 
e. Findings—The findings shall show audit action items identified with actionees, 
suspense dates, and closure status shall be submitted. See Attachment 2 for 
distribution and availability of data.
16.4 FORMAT: NASA-approved Contractor format is acceptable.
16.5 MAINTENANCE: As required to correct errors and to maintain findings closure status.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
52 of 217
ATTACHMENT 1
CONFIGURATION AUDIT REQUIRED DATA
Documentation required for the FCA (As Applicable) Documentation required for the PCA (As Applicable)
 Requirement Specifications (including ICDs).
 Drawings and parts list.
 List of approved Drawing Engineering Orders 
(EOs).
 Verification Compliance Report (VCR) (provides 
traceability for all requirements to associated 
verification objectives/requirements and to evidence 
of compliance).
 Approved Change Requests (CRs) and Variance 
Requests (VRs) (i.e. deviations/waivers) 
incorporated and pending.
 An account of Change Requests (CRs) incorporated 
and tested as well as proposed.
 Specification and drawing tree.
 Materials Usage Agreement (MUAs).
 Material Identification Usage List (MIUL).
 Certification of Qualification(s) (COQ).
 Qualification Test Deficiencies List
 Verification requirements and procedures.
 Software (CSCI)-specific data:
o Software verification data.
o Records that reflect the changes made to design 
release configuration for the CSCI.
o Software Version Description Document (VDD).
o Findings of all internal CDM and software 
(including field-programmable gate array (FPGA)
devices that contain software that runs executable 
code) QA audits of the CSCI. 
o List of FPGA devices that contain software that 
runs executable code.
 Critical Design Review (CDR) review item 
discrepancies (RIDs) and dispositions.
 Hazard Reports (HR) and HR open issues.
 Failure Mode Effects Analysis (FMEA) and FMEA 
open issues.
 List of open issues for internal or external 
interfaces.
 Test plans and procedures.
 Test reports.
 ALERTS tracking log.
 Acceptance Data Package (ADP)
 Final version of all requirement specifications 
(including ICDs).
 Configuration Status Accounting (CSA) reports as 
requested at the audit.
 Software (CSCI)-specific data:
o Final version of all software operating and support 
manuals.
o Final version of software Version Description 
Document (VDD).
o Software release and build records.
 All FCA findings (audit action items) for each 
CI/CSCI (i.e. official Audit Minutes Package).
 List of approved and outstanding CRs and VRs. 
 All approved contract Directives.
 Copies of CRs and VRs as requested at the audit.
 Data defining “as-designed” configuration:
o Drawing and specification tree.
o Product drawings and parts list as requested at the 
audit.
o Indentured Parts List (IPL).
o Lists of all outstanding EOs that have been 
incorporated into the CI (and are awaiting 
incorporation into information).
 Acceptance Test Procedures (ATPs) and associated 
ATP Report (test results).
 As-run test procedures (when applicable, include any 
test discrepancy records).
 Identification of all changes made during test.
 Identification of any approved and required changes 
not completed.
 Copy of parts tags or verification closure for 
verification items verified by inspection method.
 Data defining “as-built” configuration: 
o As-Built Configuration List (ABCL).
o Manufacturing and inspection (build) records as 
requested at the audit.
 Discrepancy Reports (DR's).
 Summary and Status of Open Materials Review Board 
(MRB) actions (including list of open MRB Actions).
Continued
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
53 of 217
ATTACHMENT 1 (Continued)
CONFIGURATION AUDIT REQUIRED DATA
Documentation required for the PCA (As Applicable)
 Proposed DD Form 250, Material Inspection and 
Receiving Report (for transfer from external 
Supplier to NASA).
 DD Form 1149, Requisition and Invoice/Shipping 
Document (for Government-to-Government 
transfer).
 Complete shortage list.
 ALERTS tracking log.
NOTE: This list may require tailoring for a specific contract and its deliverables. Examples would be 
supplementation with MBx models/data sets, deletion of software requirements if no software was required per the 
contract.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
54 of 217
ATTACHMENT 2
FCA/PCA DOCUMENTATION DISTRIBUTION AND AVAILABILITY OF DATA
Document Data 
Type
FCA Copies/Availability PCA Copies/Availability
Agenda 2 One/15 days prior to audit/approved 
copies at audit
One/15 days prior to 
audit/approved copies at audit
Data Package 3 One/Two weeks prior to audit One /Two weeks prior to audit
Presentation 
Charts
3 One for each attendee at audit One for each attendee at audit
Audit Minutes 
Package
2 One at audit/copy to each attendee 
within two weeks
One at audit/one to each attendee 
within two weeks
Findings 
(generated at 
Reviews)
2 Provided as hard copy or electronically 
per the project-specific Audit Plan. 
Close out to be as specified in the 
project-specific Audit Plan.
NOTE: This list may require tailoring for a specific contract and its deliverables.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
55 of 217
NOTE to STD-AD
Functional Configuration Audit and Physical Configuration Audit (FCA/PCA) 
Documentation
Sample Statement of Work Words (*See SOW Tailoring Note below.)
Functional Configuration Audit (FCA) and Physical Configuration Audit (PCA): FCA/PCA 
shall be conducted in accordance with the requirements specified in SAE/EIA-649-2. The data 
required to support the FCA and PCA shall be provided as defined in DRD No. STD-AD.
The Contractor shall provide the facilities and administrative support necessary for the audits. 
The requirements for the necessary support are defined in SAE/EIA-649-2 and as follows: (1) 
provide support for maintaining a system for recording, processing, tracking, and reporting the 
status of all findings (FCA/PCA Action Items) identified during the audit, corrective action, and 
closeout status; and (2) provide facilities and administrative support to the audit team(s).
*SOW Tailoring Note
Tailoring of SOW Words to Include Contractor Self-assessment FCA/PCA: (Although the 
Government normally conducts and approves the FCA/PCA, it may be beneficial to the 
Government to limit personnel involvement in the detailed reviews and delegate to the 
Contractor additional responsibility for the conduct of the FCA/PCA on a project-by-project 
basis. It is incumbent upon the NASA Project Manager and the Project CDM representative to 
assure that the project-specific additional responsibility is tailored into the SOW and that DRD 
No. STD-AD is tailored to reflect the additional documentation to be supplied.)
Application Data: FCA/PCA audits certify that configuration items (CIs/CSCIs) meet criteria for 
establishing the Product Baseline as defined in SAE/EIA-649-2. The FCA/PCA may be included 
within the scope of the Systems Acceptance Review so long as specific FCA/PCA certifications 
are obtained. 
***Sample complete CDM SOW ***
NOTE:
The applicability/tailoring instructions on this DRD are not a part of the DRD 
and should not be included in a DPD.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
56 of 217
A.12 REQUIREMENTS EXCHANGE FORMAT (REF)
DATA REQUIREMENTS DESCRIPTION (DRD)
1. DPD NO.: XXX 2. DPD STATUS: Draft 3. DRD NO.: STD-REF
4. DATA TYPE: 2/3 5. DATE REVISED: 
6. PAGE: 1/13
7. TITLE: Requirements Exchange Format (REF)
8. DESCRIPTION/USE: To facilitate digital integration and interoperability of 
requirements by defining deliverables (content, format, etc.) for requirement objects 
enabling the exchange between stakeholders during the full systems’ life cycle. Data 
delivered from a Requirements Management (RM) System or exchanged between 
disparate RM systems shall share the following minimum set of requirement attributes for 
integration purposes. This DRD contains the format and content preparation instructions 
for Requirement Objects and should be tailored for given contract. RIF/ReqIF™
(Requirements Interchange Format) is an XML file format that can be used to exchange 
requirements, along with their associated metadata, between software tools from different 
vendors. This requirements exchange format and DRD also define a workflow for 
transmitting the status of requirements between supplier chains.
9. OPR: NASA Systems Engineering and Integration (SE&I)
10. DM: NASA Configuration Management Office
11: DISTRIBUTION: TBD
12. INITIAL SUBMISSION: Within thirty (30) days of contract award
13. SUBMISSION FREQUENCY: Thirty (30) days prior to each Contract Major 
Milestone. Interim submittals shall be made available per request up to 60 days prior to a 
scheduled delivery.
14. REMARKS: NASA will provide draft delivery schedule and interim requests through 
the Contracting Officer’s Representative to the contractor within sixty (60) days of 
contract award.
15. INTERRELATIONSHIP: None
16. DATA PREPARATION INFORMATION:
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
57 of 217
16.1 SCOPE: Supplier shall deliver requirement data sets necessary to support the building of 
an integrated requirement set representing the program’s top level end items representing 
the integrated system.
16.2 APPLICABLE ITEMS: 
SAE/EIA-649-2 Configuration Management Requirements for NASA
Enterprises
RIF/ReqIF™ Requirements Interchange Format
ISO 10303-233 Part 233: Application protocol: Systems engineering
ISO/TS 10303-1348 Requirement management
16.3 CONTENTS: The following items provide a technical description of the items 
necessary for supporting an acquisition, production, engineering, and logistics support 
(e.g. requirements data for the entire life cycle [initial design through retirement]).
16.3.1 Technical Data Package shall include one or more of the following:
UUID—Universally Unique IDentifier is a 16-octet (128-bit) number. In its 
canonical form, a UUID is represented by 32 hexadecimal digits, displayed in five 
groups separated by hyphens, in the form 8-4-4-4-12 for a total of 36 characters 
(32 alphanumeric characters and four hyphens). (Source: In accordance with
ISO/IEC 11578:1996, Information Technology – Open Systems Interconnection –
Remote Procedure Call [RPC])
For example: 550e8400-e29b-41d4-a716-446655440000
Datetime—The combination of a date and a time. Its value space is described as a 
combination of date and time of day in Chapter 5.4 of ISO 8601. Its lexical space 
is the extended format:
[-]CCYY-MM-DDThh:mm:ss[Z|(+|-)hh:mm]
The time zone may be specified as Z(UTC) or (+|-)hh:mm. Time zones that are 
not specified are considered undetermined.
For example: 2013-04-25T23:54:32.000Z
Object Type = REQUIREMENT
A requirement is defined as the agreed upon need, desire, want, capability, 
capacity, or demand for personnel, equipment, facilities, or other resources or 
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
58 of 217
services by specified quantities for specific periods of time or at a specified time 
expressed as a “shall” statement. Acceptable form for a requirement statement is 
individually clear, correct, feasible to obtain, unambiguous in meaning, and can 
be validated at the level of the system structure at which stated. In pairs of 
requirement statements or as a set, collectively, they are not redundant, are 
adequately related with respect to terms used, and are not in conflict with one 
another.
Required attributes
Requirement ID number—A system identifier assigned by the owning RM 
system which is unique to the owning RM system.
Property type = fixed-string
Cardinality = single
Max length = 60 characters
Requirement UUID—Universally Unique Identifier (see above)
Property type = UUID
Cardinality = single
Max length = 36 characters (32 alphanumeric characters and four hyphens)
Requirement Name—Short text/title of the requirement object.
Property type = string
Cardinality = single
Max length = unlimited * 
Requirement Text (Description)—The “shall” statement defining the specific 
requirement.
Property type = string
Cardinality = single
Max length = unlimited *
Lifecycle Status/State—Life-cycle status or state of the requirement.
Legal values =
In-Work - Initial stage of an item that has not been through any review 
process
Completed - Item that has been reviewed and approved but has not been 
baselined
Accepted - Item that has been reviewed and approved by a panel/board 
and is ready for baseline
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
59 of 217
Obsolete – Item that has been overcome by events, canceled, or deleted, 
and is no longer valid. 
Property type = string 
Cardinality = single
Previous Version UUID—The UUID of the previous version of the specified 
requirement. If no previous version exists, use the current version UUID.
Property type = UUID
Cardinality = single
Max length = 36 characters (32 alphanumeric characters and four hyphens)
Last Modified Date—The date this object was last modified.
Property type = datetime
Cardinality = single
System Id—The identification of the sender/source system that is unique and 
constant throughout the life of system. The Digital Collaborative Environment
(DCE) assigned string with input from system owner.
Property type = constant unique string
Cardinality = single
Max length = 36 characters
Optional Attributes – (include as applicable)
Requirement Type—The initial classification of a requirement that is mandatory 
for correct requirements definition and relationship definition
Constraint**—Requirement associated with a limitation or implied 
requirement that constrains the design solution or implementation of the 
systems engineering process, is not changeable by the enterprise
Functional**—Requirement associated with identifying, describing, and 
relating the functions a system must perform to fulfill its goals and 
objectives
Interface**—Requirement associated with identifying, describing, and 
relating the functions a system must perform to fulfill its goals and 
objectives
Performance**—How well these functions must be performed (used in 
terms of quantity, quality, coverage, timeliness, or readiness), along with the 
conditions under which the function is performed
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
60 of 217
Physical—A requirement that specifies a physical characteristic that a 
system or system component must possess.
TPM (Technical Performance Measure)—The identification, prediction, 
measurement, and demonstration of the achievement of key technical 
objectives that reflect the ability of the system design to satisfy the system 
effectiveness objectives.
Verification—Requirements that specify the verification events needed to 
prove the satisfaction of the product requirements and help to define the 
verification process and environment 
Operational**—Requirements associated with identifying, describing, and 
relating the operations of a system must perform to fulfill Mission 
Objectives
Maintenance—Requirements that define the actions necessary for retaining 
an item in or restoring it to a specific condition
Property type = string
Cardinality = single
Rationale—Contains Rationale of why and what of the internal and external 
requirement. Intended to clarify or give additional information that may be needed 
for the user to better understand the scope of the requirement
Property type = string
Cardinality = single
Max length = unlimited *
Comment—Additional text about the object
Property type = string
Cardinality = single
Max length = unlimited *
Upstream UUID—The UUID of the requirement from which this requirement 
was derived. This information will allow for validation of traceability
Property type = UUID 
Cardinality = multi
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
61 of 217
Downstream UUID—The UUID of the requirement(s) that are derived from this 
requirement (the “children” of this “parent”)
Property type = UUID
Cardinality = multi
Verification Method – The method by which this requirement will be verified
Legal values =
Test - the verification of a product or system using a controlled and 
predefined series of inputs, data, or stimuli to ensure that the product or 
system will produce a very specific and predefined output as specified by 
the requirements.
Demonstration - the manipulation of the product or system as it is intended 
to be used to verify that the results are as planned or expected.
Inspection - the nondestructive examination of a product or system using 
one or more of the five senses (visual, auditory, olfactory, tactile, taste). It 
may include simple physical manipulation and measurements
Analysis - the verification of a product or system using models, 
calculations, and testing equipment. Analysis allows predictive statements 
to be made about the typical performance of a product or system based on 
the confirmed test results of a sample set or by combining the outcome of 
individual tests to conclude something new about the product or system. It 
is often used to predict the breaking point or failure of a product or system 
by using nondestructive tests to extrapolate the failure point.
Property type = string
Cardinality = multi
** As defined by the NASA Data Architecture Framework (NDAF).
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
62 of 217
Object type = REQUIREMENT SPECIFICATION
Required attributes
Specification UUID—UUID of the specification
Property type = UUID
Cardinality = single
Specification Name—Short text/title of the specification object
Property type = string
Cardinality = single
Max length = unlimited * 
Specification number—A system identifier assigned by the owning RM system 
which is unique to the owning RM system
Property type = fixed-string
Cardinality = single
Max length = 60 characters
Lifecycle Status/State—Life-cycle status or state of the specification
Legal values =
In-Work - Initial stage of an item that has not been through any review 
process
Completed - Item that has been reviewed and approved but has not been 
baselined
Accepted - Item that has been reviewed and approved by a panel/board and 
is ready for baseline
Obsolete – Item that has been overcome by events, canceled or deleted, and 
is no longer valid. 
Property type = string 
Cardinality = single
Specification Description—A description of the requirement specification
Property type = string
Cardinality = single
Max length = unlimited *
Specification Effectivity—Defines the applicability of a specific revision of a 
specification to specific end item(s) (i.e. to which specific hardware or software 
item instance does this specification apply?)
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
63 of 217
Property type = string
Cardinality = multi
Max length = unlimited *
Optional Attributes
Upstream UUID—The UUID of the requirement specification from which this 
specification was derived. This information will allow for validation of 
traceability.
Property type = UUID 
Cardinality = multi
Downstream UUID—The UUID of the requirement specifications that are 
derived from this specification (the “children” of this “parent”)
Property type = UUID 
Cardinality = multi
Previous Version UUID—The UUID of the previous version of the 
specification. If no previous version exists, use the current version UUID.
Property type = UUID 
Cardinality = multi
Last Modified Date—The date this object was last modified
Property type = datetime
Cardinality = single
System Id—The identification of the sender/source system that is unique and 
constant throughout the life of system. DCE assigned string with input from 
system owner.
Property type = constant unique string
Cardinality = single
Max length = 36 characters
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
64 of 217
.xml code (example):
<cmisra:type xsi:type="cmisTypeDocumentDefinitionType">
 <id>Requirement</id>
 <localName>Requirement</localName>
 <localNamespace>http://dce.nasa.gov/</localNamespace>
 <parentId>cmis:document</parentId>
 <displayName>Requirement Type</displayName>
 <queryName>REQUIREMENT</queryName>
 <description>The DCE Requirement Type</description>
 <baseId>cmis:document</baseId>
 <creatable>true</creatable>
 <fileable>true</fileable>
 <queryable>false</queryable>
 <fulltextIndexed>false</fulltextIndexed>
 <includedInSupertypeQuery>true</includedInSupertypeQuery>
 <controllablePolicy>false</controllablePolicy>
 <controllableACL>false</controllableACL>
 <versionable>false</versionable>
 <contentStreamAllowed>NOT_ALLOWED</contentStreamAllowed>
 <propertyStringDefinition>
 <id>UUID</id>
 <localName>UUID</localName>
 <displayName>UUID</displayName>
 <queryName>UUID</queryName>
 <description>The unique identifier for the object</description>
 <propertyType>string</propertyType>
 <cardinality>single</cardinality>
 <updatability>readwrite</updatability>
 <inherited>false</inherited>
 <required>true</required>
 <queryable>false</queryable>
 <orderable>false</orderable>
 </propertyStringDefinition>
 <propertyStringDefinition>
 <id>FromUUID</id>
 <localName>FromUUID</localName>
 <displayName>FromUUID</displayName>
 <queryName>FromUUID</queryName>
 <description>A list of From UUIDs</description>
 <propertyType>string</propertyType>
 <cardinality>multi</cardinality>
 <updatability>readwrite</updatability>
 <inherited>false</inherited>
 <required>false</required>
 <queryable>false</queryable>
 <orderable>false</orderable>
 </propertyStringDefinition>
 <propertyStringDefinition>
 <id>ToUUID</id>
 <localName>ToUUID</localName>
 <displayName>ToUUID</displayName>
 <queryName>ToUUID</queryName>
 <description>A list of To UUIDs</description>
 <propertyType>string</propertyType>
 <cardinality>multi</cardinality>
 <updatability>readwrite</updatability>
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
65 of 217
 <inherited>false</inherited>
 <required>false</required>
 <queryable>false</queryable>
 <orderable>false</orderable>
 </propertyStringDefinition>
 <propertyStringDefinition>
 <id>Name</id>
 <localName>Name</localName>
 <displayName>Name</displayName>
 <queryName>Name</queryName>
 <description>The name of the requirement</description>
 <propertyType>string</propertyType>
 <cardinality>single</cardinality>
 <updatability>readwrite</updatability>
 <inherited>false</inherited>
 <required>true</required>
 <queryable>false</queryable>
 <orderable>false</orderable>
 </propertyStringDefinition>
 <propertyStringDefinition>
 <id>Number</id>
 <localName>Number</localName>
 <displayName>Number</displayName>
 <queryName>Number</queryName>
 <description>The number of the requirement</description>
 <propertyType>string</propertyType>
 <cardinality>single</cardinality>
 <updatability>readwrite</updatability>
 <inherited>false</inherited>
 <required>true</required>
 <queryable>false</queryable>
 <orderable>false</orderable>
 </propertyStringDefinition>
 <propertyStringDefinition>
 <id>Lifecycle State</id>
 <localName>Lifecycle State</localName>
 <displayName>Lifecycle State</displayName>
 <queryName>Lifecycle State</queryName>
 <description>The lifecycle state of the requirement</description>
 <propertyType>string</propertyType>
 <cardinality>single</cardinality>
 <updatability>readwrite</updatability>
 <inherited>false</inherited>
 <required>true</required>
 <queryable>false</queryable>
 <orderable>false</orderable>
 <openChoice>false</openChoice>
 <choice displayName="In-Work">
 <value>In-Work</value>
 </choice>
 <choice displayName="Completed">
 <value>Completed</value>
 </choice>
 <choice displayName="Accepted">
 <value>Accepted</value>
 </choice>
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
66 of 217
 <choice displayName="Obsolete">
 <value>Obsolete</value>
 </choice>
 </propertyStringDefinition>
 <propertyStringDefinition>
 <id>Requirement</id>
 <localName>Requirement</localName>
 <displayName>Requirement</displayName>
 <queryName>Requirement</queryName>
 <description>The text of the requirement (shall statement)
 </description>
 <propertyType>string</propertyType>
 <cardinality>single</cardinality>
 <updatability>readwrite</updatability>
 <inherited>false</inherited>
 <required>true</required>
 <queryable>false</queryable>
 <orderable>false</orderable>
 </propertyStringDefinition>
 <propertyStringDefinition>
 <id>Rationale</id>
 <localName>Rationale</localName>
 <displayName>Rationale</displayName>
 <queryName>Rationale</queryName>
 <description>The reasoning behind the requirement</description>
 <propertyType>string</propertyType>
 <cardinality>single</cardinality>
 <updatability>readwrite</updatability>
 <inherited>false</inherited>
 <required>false</required>
 <queryable>false</queryable>
 <orderable>false</orderable>
 </propertyStringDefinition>
 <propertyStringDefinition>
 <id>Comment</id>
 <localName>Comment</localName>
 <displayName>Comment</displayName>
 <queryName>Comment</queryName>
 <description>A comment about the object</description>
 <propertyType>string</propertyType>
 <cardinality>single</cardinality>
 <updatability>readwrite</updatability>
 <inherited>false</inherited>
 <required>false</required>
 <queryable>false</queryable>
 <orderable>false</orderable>
 </propertyStringDefinition>
 <propertyStringDefinition>
 <id>Category</id>
 <localName>Category</localName>
 <displayName>Category</displayName>
 <queryName>Category</queryName>
 <description>The category of the requirement</description>
 <propertyType>string</propertyType>
 <cardinality>single</cardinality>
 <updatability>readwrite</updatability>
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
67 of 217
 <inherited>false</inherited>
 <required>false</required>
 <queryable>false</queryable>
 <orderable>false</orderable>
 <openChoice>false</openChoice>
 <choice displayName="Constraint">
 <value>Constraint</value>
 </choice>
 <choice displayName="Functional">
 <value>Functional</value>
 </choice>
 <choice displayName="Interface">
 <value>Interface</value>
 </choice>
 <choice displayName="Performance">
 <value>Performance</value>
 </choice>
 <choice displayName="Physical">
 <value>Physical</value>
 </choice>
 <choice displayName="Technical Performance Measure">
 <value>Technical Performance Measure</value>
 </choice>
 <choice displayName="Verification">
 <value>Verification </value>
 </choice>
 <choice displayName="Operational">
 <value>Operational</value>
 </choice>
 <choice displayName="Maintenance">
 <value>Maintenance</value>
 </choice>
 </propertyStringDefinition>
 <propertyStringDefinition>
 <id>VerificationMethod</id>
 <localName>VerificationMethod</localName>
 <displayName>Verification Method</displayName>
 <queryName>VerificationMethod</queryName>
 <description>The verification method of the requirement</description>
 <propertyType>string</propertyType>
 <cardinality>multi</cardinality>
 <updatability>readwrite</updatability>
 <inherited>false</inherited>
 <required>false</required>
 <queryable>false</queryable>
 <orderable>false</orderable>
 <openChoice>false</openChoice>
 <choice displayName="Test">
 <value>Test</value>
 </choice>
 <choice displayName="Demonstration">
 <value>Demonstration</value>
 </choice>
 <choice displayName="Inspection">
 <value>Inspection</value>
 </choice>
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
68 of 217
 <choice displayName="Analysis">
 <value>Analysis</value>
 </choice>
 </propertyStringDefinition>
 <propertyStringDefinition>
 <id>PreviousVersionUUID</id>
 <localName>PreviousVersionUUID</localName>
 <displayName>PreviousVersionUUID</displayName>
 <queryName>PreviousVersionUUID</queryName>
 <description>The previous version UUID. If no previous version exists
 then use the current version UUID
 </description>
 <propertyType>string</propertyType>
 <cardinality>single</cardinality>
 <updatability>readwrite</updatability>
 <inherited>false</inherited>
 <required>true</required>
 <queryable>false</queryable>
 <orderable>false</orderable>
 </propertyStringDefinition>
 <propertyDateTimeDefinition>
 <id>LastModificationDate</id>
 <localName>LastModificationDate</localName>
 <localNamespace>LastModificationDate</localNamespace>
 <displayName>Last Modified Date</displayName>
 <queryName>LastModificationDate</queryName>
 <description>The date this object was last modified</description>
 <propertyType>datetime</propertyType>
 <cardinality>single</cardinality>
 <updatability>readwrite</updatability>
 <inherited>false</inherited>
 <required>true</required>
 <queryable>false</queryable>
 <orderable>false</orderable>
 </propertyDateTimeDefinition>
 <propertyStringDefinition>
 <id>SystemId</id>
 <localName>SystemId</localName>
 <displayName>System ID</displayName>
 <queryName>SystemId</queryName>
 <description>The System Identification of the sender</description>
 <propertyType>string</propertyType>
 <cardinality>single</cardinality>
 <updatability>readwrite</updatability>
 <in– format herited>false</inherited>
 <required>true</required>
 <queryable>false</queryable>
 <orderable>false</orderable>
 </propertyStringDefinition>
 </cmisra:type>
16.4 FORMAT: As specified (RIF/ReqIF™ compatible, preferably in/via the extensible 
markup language (XML) template provided)
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
69 of 217
16.5 MAINTENANCE: As long as there are requirements—entire life cycle/as 
changed/modified/updated.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
70 of 217
A.13 MASTER RECORDS INDEX (MRI)
DATA REQUIREMENTS DESCRIPTION (DRD)
1. DPD NO.: XXX 2. DPD STATUS: Draft 3. DRD NO.: STD-MRI
4. DATA TYPE: 1 5. DATE REVISED: 
6. PAGE: 1/7
7. TITLE: Master Records Index (MRI)
8. DESCRIPTION/USE: Defines the standard of build of the System or End Item,
including all associated CIs. The index comprises a key to the approved models, 
drawings, and associated records and lists all design changes introduced by amendments 
and modifications. The MRI is used by the Contractor to define the system product asdelivered. The MRI is used by the Government to ensure that the system product meets its 
build standard and requirements.
9. OPR: NASA Configuration Management Office (CMO) or their Representative
10. DM: NASA Data Management Office (DMO) or their Representative
11: DISTRIBUTION: Per Contracting Officer’s letter
12. INITIAL SUBMISSION: Submit 90 days post start of build.
13. SUBMISSION FREQUENCY: Submit quarterly updates as well as when necessary due 
to contract changes.
14. REMARKS: This DRD is written for use in procurements involving deliveries of digital 
data sets (involving documents as well as models).
15. INTERRELATIONSHIPS:
15.1 The MRI is subordinate to the following data items, where these data items are required 
under the Contract:
a. Configuration and Data Management Plan (CDMP);
b. Systems Engineering Management Plan (SEMP); and
c. Integrated Support Plan (ISP).
15.2 The MRI inter-relates with the following data items, where these data items are required 
under the Contract:
a. Engineering Models/Drawings; and
b. Master Equipment List (MEL). 
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
71 of 217
16. DATA PREPARATION INFORMATION:
16.1 SCOPE: The data item shall include a traceability matrix that defines how each specific 
content requirement, as contained in this DRD, is addressed by sections within the data 
item.
16.2 APPLICABLE ITEMS:
SAE EIA-649, Configuration Management Standard
SAE EIA-649-2, Configuration Management Requirements for NASA Enterprises
16.3 CONTENTS: 
16.3.1 As a minimum, the MRI shall consist of the following items and be consistent with SAE 
EIA-649 and SAE EIA-649-2:
a. Cover Sheet.
b. Index of amendments and modifications.
c. Index of Subsidiary/Subcontractor Master Record Indices.
d. Index of Configuration Items (CIs).
(1) The Index of CIs shall be developed from data in the Configuration Item List.
(2) The Index of CIs shall list, in hierarchical form, all the CIs constituting the 
Mission System.
(3) The Index of CIs shall be sorted in System and then Subsystem order.
(4) The Index of CIs shall detail the following information for each CI:
A. CI Reference Number. This field shall detail the reference number allocated to 
the CI by the Contractor. This number is to relate the CI to the higher level 
assembly to which it belongs in a hierarchical manner to system level.
B. CI Nomenclature. This field shall detail the name allocated to the CI.
C. CI Type. This field shall detail whether the CI is a Hardware Configuration 
Item (HWCI) or a Computer Software Configuration Item (CSCI).
D. HWCI. This field is applicable to CSCIs that reside on HWCIs and shall detail 
the HWCI in which the CSCI resides.
E. Subsystem. This field shall detail the CI’s parent Subsystem.
F. System. This field shall detail the CI’s parent System.
G. Design Organization. This field shall detail the organization responsible for 
design of the CI.
H. Headings. Headings shall be positioned in the Index of CIs to identify where 
each System and Subsystem begins.
e. Index of Components (IOC)
(1) The IOC shall detail, in hierarchical form, the physical build structure of the 
System, going down to and including piece parts.
(2) The IOC shall be sorted in System, then Subsystem, and then CI order.
(3) The IOC shall detail the following information for each item in the IOC:
A. Indenture Level. This field shall document the indenture level of the item; the 
System is indenture level 1.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
72 of 217
B. Part Number. This field shall document the item’s Part Number.
C. Variant Number. When more than one variant of an item has been used in the 
construction of the System, the Part Number of each variant is to be given a 
variant number (e.g. 1, 2, 3). This field shall default to one (1) when only one 
variant of an item has been used.
D. Part Number Status. This field shall contain the status of the Part Number (e.g. 
PROPOSED, CURRENT, OBSOLETE, OR HISTORICAL).
E. Quantity Fitted. This field shall document the quantity of the item fitted to the 
item’s next higher assembly.
F. Drawing Number. This field shall document the Drawing Number of the item.
G. Nomenclature. This field shall document the item’s nomenclature.
H. Headings. Headings shall be positioned in the IOC to identify where each 
System, Subsystem, and CI begins.
f. Indentured Drawing List (IDL)
(1) The IDL shall list, in hierarchical form, all the drawings constituting the System 
design, including Subcontractor drawings.
(2) The IDL shall detail the following information for each drawing:
A. Indenture Level. This field shall document the indenture level of the drawing.
B. Drawing Number. This field shall document the drawing number.
C. Revision Letter. This field shall document the latest revision letter of the 
drawing applicable to the System.
D. Drawing Title. This field shall document the title of the drawing.
E. Drawing Type. This field shall document the drawing type to which the 
drawing belongs, e.g. Detail Assembly Drawing, Specification Control 
Drawing, Wiring List, etc.
F. Drawing Size. This field shall document the sheet size of the drawing, e.g. A2, 
A3, etc.
G. Number of Sheets. This field shall document the number of sheets making up 
the drawing.
H. Revision Date. This field shall document the date of the latest revision.
g. Index of Configuration Documentation (IOCD)
(1) The IOCD shall list the Configuration Documentation describing the functional, 
allocated, and product baselines for the System (drawings are to be excluded from 
the IOCD, as they have been listed elsewhere).
(2) The IOCD shall be divided into two (2) sections as follows:
A. Sort Section 1 in System, then Subsystem, then CI order.
B. Sort Section 2 in Document Type and then Document Reference Number 
order.
(3) The IOCD shall detail the following information for each document:
A. CI Reference Number. This field shall detail the CI Reference Number to 
which the document is applicable.
B. CI Nomenclature. This field shall detail the CI’s nomenclature.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
73 of 217
C. Document Reference Number. This field shall detail the document’s reference 
number.
D. Document Revision Number. This field shall detail the revision number/level
of the document.
E. Document Type. This field shall detail the type of document to which the 
document belongs and include the following types of Configuration 
Documentation, as a minimum, where produced:
i. System Specifications.
ii. Development Specifications.
iii. Product Specifications.
iv. Interface Control Documents.
v. Software Requirements Specifications.
vi. Interface Requirements Specifications.
vii. Software Product Specifications.
viii. Software Version Descriptions.
ix. Software Design Descriptions.
x. Interface Design Descriptions.
xi. Database Design Descriptions.
xii. Materials Specifications.
xiii. Process Specifications.
F. Revision Date. This field shall document the date of the latest revision.
G. Headings. Headings shall be positioned as follows:
i. In Section 1 to indicate where each System, Subsystem, and CI begins.
ii. In Section 2 to indicate where each Document Type begins.
h. Index of Technical Manuals (IOTM)
(1) The IOTM shall list the technical manuals developed under the Contract.
(2) The IOTM shall be divided into two (2) sections:
A. Sort Section 1 in System, then Subsystem, then CI order.
B. Sort Section 2 in AAP Number, then Contractor Reference Number order.
(3) The IOTM shall detail the following information for each Technical Manual:
A. Publication Number or Equivalent. This field shall detail the Publication 
Number or equivalent allocated to the Technical Manual. Where there is no 
need to allocate a Publication Number to a Technical Manual, this field is to 
contain the following entry: NOT REQUIRED.
B. Contract CAGE Code Number. This field shall detail the authoring 
Contractor’s CAGE Code Number for the Technical Manual.
C. Title. This field shall detail the title of the Technical Manual.
D. Related CIs. This field shall detail the Configuration Items to which the 
Technical Manual is applicable.
E. Headings. Headings shall be positioned as follows:
i. In Section 1 to indicate where each System, Subsystem, and CI begins.
ii. No headings need to be positioned in Section 2.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
74 of 217
i. Index of Major (Class I) Engineering Change Proposals (ECPs)
(1) The Index of Major ECPs shall document all Major ECPs raised against the 
System and its constituent items during the Contract, including those raised by the 
Subcontractors.
(2) The Index of Major ECPs shall detail the following information for each ECP:
A. ECP Number. This field shall document the unique ECP identification 
number.
B. ECP Revision Letter. This field shall document the revision level of the ECP.
C. ECP Justification Code. This field shall document the ECP Justification Code. 
(Refer to information defined in MIL-HDBK-61A, Configuration 
Management Guidance.)
D. ECP Title. This field shall document the title of the ECP.
E. Date Raised. This field shall document the date the ECP was raised.
F. ECP Status. This field shall document the status of the ECP.
G. Status Change: This field shall document the date the status of the ECP 
changes.
H. Configuration Control Board (CCB) Decision. This field shall document the 
decision made by the CCB.
I. Decision Date. This field shall document the date of the CCB decision.
J. Impacted CIs. This field shall document the CIs impacted by the ECP.
K. Affected Part Numbers. This field shall document the CI Part Number variants 
impacted by the ECP.
L. New Part Numbers. This field shall document the new CI Part Number 
variants introduced as a result of the ECP. Where the new Part Number is 
simply a re-identification of an existing Part Number, this relationship shall be 
clearly shown.
M. Production Effectivity. This field shall document the production effectivity of 
the ECP.
N. Retrofit Effectivity. This field shall document the retrofit effectivity of the 
ECP.
j. Index of Minor (Class II) Engineering Change Proposals (ECPs)
(1) The Index of Minor ECPs shall document all Minor ECPs raised against the 
System and its constituent items during the Contract, including those raised by the 
Subcontractors.
(2) The Index of Minor ECPs shall detail the following information for each ECP:
A. ECP Number. This field shall document the unique ECP identification 
number.
B. ECP Revision Letter. This field shall document the revision level of the ECP.
C. ECP Title. This field shall document the title or a brief description of the ECP.
D. Date Raised. This field shall document the date the ECP was raised.
E. ECP Status. This field shall document the status of the ECP.
F. Approval Authority. This field shall document who approved or rejected the 
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
75 of 217
ECP.
G. Decision Date. This field shall document the date the approval authority 
approved or rejected the ECP.
H. Impacted CI. This field shall document the CI impacted by the ECP.
I. CI Part Numbers. This field shall document the CI Part Number variants 
impacted by the ECP.
J. Production Effectivity. This field shall document the production effectivity of 
the ECP.
k. Index of Requests for Variance (RFVs)
(1) The Index of RFVs shall document all RFVs raised against the System and its 
constituent items during the Contract, including those raised by the 
Subcontractors.
(2) The Index of RFVs shall be divided into three (3) sections as follows:
A. List RFVs classified as Critical in Section 1.
B. List RFVs classified as Major in Section 2.
C. List RFVs classified as Minor in Section 3.
(3) Each section shall be further subdivided into two (2) subsections as follows:
A. Sort subsection 1 in RFV Reference Number order.
B. Sort subsection 2 in System, then Subsystem, then CI order.
(4) The Index of RFVs shall detail the following information for each RFV:
A. RFV Reference Number. This field shall document the unique RFV 
identification number.
B. RFV Title/Description. This field shall document the title or provide a brief 
description of the RFV.
C. RFV Class. This field shall document the class of the RFV, i.e. Critical, 
Major, or Minor.
D. Date Raised. This field shall document the date the RFV was raised.
E. RFV Status. This field shall document the status of the RFV.
F. Approval Authority. This field shall document who approved or rejected the 
RFV.
G. Decision Date. This field shall document the date the approval authority 
approved or rejected the RFV.
H. Impacted CI. This field shall document the CI impacted by the RFV.
I. CI Part Number. This field shall document the CI Part Number variant 
impacted by the RFV.
J. Affected Part Number. This field shall document the Part Number of the item 
subject to the RFV.
K. Affected Serial Numbers. This field shall document the Serials Number(s) of 
the item subject to the RFV.
L. Maintenance-Managed Item (MMI) Part Number. If the affected item is not an 
MMI and does not build directly to the CI, then this field shall document the 
Part Number of the higher level MMI.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
76 of 217
M. MMI Serial Number(s). This field shall document the Serial Number(s) of the 
MMI specified at subparagraph L above.
N. Headings. Headings shall be positioned in Subsection 2 to indicate where each 
System, Subsystem, and CI begins. No headings need to be positioned in 
Subsection 1.
l. Index of Ancillary Equipment (IAE)
(1) The IAE shall list the support and test equipment (S&TE) and training equipment 
(hereinafter known as Ancillary Equipment) required to support the 
maintenance/operation of the System and its constituent items.
(2) The IAE shall be divided into two (2) sections as follows:
A. Sort Section 1 by Ancillary Equipment Type, then by Ancillary Equipment 
Designation.
B. Sort Section 2 by Supported CI, then Ancillary Equipment Type, then 
Ancillary Equipment Designation order.
(3) The IAE shall detail the following information for each piece of Ancillary 
Equipment:
A. Ancillary Equipment Designation. This field shall document the designation 
of the Ancillary Equipment.
B. Nomenclature. This field shall document the nomenclature of the Ancillary 
Equipment.
C. Ancillary Equipment Type. This field shall document the support equipment 
type to which the Ancillary Equipment belongs (e.g. Ground Support 
Equipment, Automatic Test Equipment, Special Tool Type Tooling, etc.)
D. Supported CI(s). This field shall document the CI(s) supported by the 
Ancillary Equipment.
E. CI Part Number Variant(s). This field shall document the CI Part Number 
Variant(s) supported by the Ancillary Equipment.
F. Affected Part Numbers. If the item(s) supported by the Ancillary Equipment 
is/are below the CI level, then this field shall document the Part Number(s) of 
the item(s) supported by the Ancillary Equipment.
G. Headings. Headings shall be positioned as follows:
i. In Section 1 to indicate where each Ancillary Equipment Type begins.
ii. In Section 2 to indicate where each CI begins.
16.4 FORMAT: An MRI template will be made available from the Government, supplier 
digital formats (e.g. Microsoft® Excel®, comma-separated values [CSV], extensible 
markup language [XML], etc.) acceptable upon approval by the Government.
16.5 MAINTENANCE: Changes shall be incorporated by complete revision/reissue and 
submitted per item 13, SUBMISSION FREQUENCY, in this DRD.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
77 of 217
A.14 CONTRACT LANGUAGE FOR DATA ACQUISITION AND
INTEROPERABILITY
A.14.1 Data Acquisition
This section provides guidance for ensuring that NASA provides data acquisition requirements to 
enable the reference and reuse of data through a program/project’s full life cycle. 
Data acquisition requirements should be initially presented during Requests for Proposal 
(RFP)/Request for Quote (RFQ) development to establish integrated data architecture for a 
program/project’s information systems architecture, data architecture, and information systems 
capability roadmap. The ability to meet data interoperability requirements should be a part of the 
contract performance metrics on which the Contractor has to report and be evaluated throughout 
contract execution. This recommended contract language should be applied to the Center’s data 
procurement documents.
The following contract language is categorized based on the type of data interoperability being 
performed. Also included is contract language pertaining to metadata and data transmittal:
 
a. Proprietary Formatted Data includes data that is generated on a commercial off-theshelf (COTS) or custom-built application where the application’s data format is proprietary to 
those systems. The Contractor should provide or deliver the following:
(1) A definition of the application and version that produced the file.
(2) The native proprietary file itself.
(3) A commonly readable representation of the file (Joint Photographic Experts 
Group [JPEG, JPG], Graphics Interchange Format [GIF], Portable Network 
Graphics [PNG], or machine-readable Portable Document Format/Archivable
[PDF/A]).
(4) The application (source code and executable), with the concurrence of the NASA 
Contracting Officer’s Representative, required to read the native file format for 
file types where there is no commonly readable representation of the file.
(5) Object Management Group (OMG), 2D/3D formats, videos, neutral and/or 3D 
PDF files.
b. Structured Digital Data from a Source Repository is digital data extraction from a 
source data repository provided in a computer-readable format that maintains the referential 
integrity of the data. 
(1) The Contractor shall provide structured, computer-readable data, including all 
relationships between data, in one of the following formats:
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
78 of 217
A. Where Extensible Markup Language (XML) is applied, the Contractor should 
implement an architecture that complies with the applicable NASA IT 
standards and enable digital data interoperability within NASA domains, 
World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) XML, W3C Namespaces for XML, and 
W3C XML Schema. 
B. Where XML is applied, the Contractor should respond to NASA’s requests for 
IT data items via W3C XML, W3C XML Namespaces, W3C XML Schema, 
and OMG XML Metadata Interchange (XMI) for Models.
C. For standard XML digital data descriptions to be usable, all producers and 
consumers of digital data should reference a common data dictionary as 
defined by NASA. If a NASA standard is not applicable or available, digital 
data should reference a common data dictionary as defined by the Contractor 
that includes the following:
i. Database output format (e.g. Structured Query Language (SQL) 
output).
ii. Structured database output files should include the database type and 
version (e.g. MySQL2, version 5.5.1).
iii. The Contractor should provide computer-readable definitions of record 
structure (schema) for both XML and database output formats.
c. Document-Formatted Data describes documents created in established textprocessing applications. Document data should be delivered in a digital form in one of the 
following formats:
(1) Text-searchable (machine-readable) PDF (rather than scanned PDF).
(2) Microsoft® Word® and Microsoft® Excel® files.
(3) Other commonly readable format (e.g. a text file (.txt), or rich text format (.rtf)) 
approved by NASA.
d. Metadata describes the contents of digital files. Metadata should be defined in a 
computer-readable data format to support automation and facilitate data interoperability.
(1) Descriptive metadata describes an information resource for identification and 
retrieval through elements such as title, author, and abstract.
(2) Structural metadata documents relationships within and among objects through 
elements such as links to other components (e.g. how pages are put together to 
form chapters).
 
2MySQL is a relational database management system that runs as a server providing multi-user access to a number 
of databases.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
79 of 217
(1) Administrative metadata helps to manage information resources through elements 
such as version number, archiving date, and other technical information for 
purposes of file management, rights management and preservation.
Metadata should be cataloged and published for reuse by all program/project teams to 
facilitate proper data interoperability.
(1) Acceptable metadata formats include:
A. Comma-Separated Value (CSV) format.
B. XML format.
C. Other fully documented, standards-based format approved by NASA such as 
embedded PDF/A documents.
(2) Metadata should be delivered with the file to which it is related and reference the 
filename or other identifying features (e.g. timestamp). 
(3) The Contractor should apply ISO 10303-233, Industrial automation systems and 
integration - Product data representation and exchange - Part 233: Application 
protocol: Systems engineering, as a foundation for defining common system 
engineering metadata. 
(4) The Contractor should apply ISO 10303-239, Industrial automation systems and 
integration - Product data representation and exchange - Part 239: Application 
protocol: Product life cycle support, for common systems engineering metadata.
(5) Metadata used during a program/project phase should be defined more than 90 
days prior to its first use.
e. Transmittal of data should be via one of the following options; the data transmission 
method should be defined in each DRD and Statement of Work (SOW)/Performance Work 
Statement (PWS):
(1) View data in Contractor systems should support viewing data within the 
Contractor’s electronic system in a format readable by a standard NASA 
workstation or otherwise approved by NASA. This action will be deemed as a 
delivery of data in place, and such data will be maintained within the Contractor’s 
system. 
(2) Direct entry to NASA’s system should include direct user entry of data into a 
NASA-owned system, including fields, values, or other information as required 
by the NASA system.
(3) Upload to NASA file repository should include uploading files, whether 
document-formatted data or structured data (e.g. SQL output), and completing 
any associated data as required by the formats (above) and the file repository, 
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
80 of 217
including Center, program/project, or other specific repository specified in the 
DRD.
(4) A system-to-system connection should provide an automated capability to pass 
computer-readable data between a Contractor and NASA system, across 
Contractor and NASA firewalls, via one of several mechanisms, including, but 
not limited to:
A. Representational State Transfer (REST) application programming interface 
(API) for digital data delivery via Internet-based communication (data defined 
by either a NASA or Contractor standard data exchange format). 
B. Simple Object Access Protocol (SOAP) API for digital data delivery via 
Internet-based communication.
C. Fully documented, standards-based API supported by Contractor tools 
approved by NASA. 
(5) The Contractor should encrypt sensitive information during transmission.
A. The Contractor should utilize the National Institute of Standards and 
Technology (NIST) 800 Series Publications and FIPS PUB 140-2, Security 
Requirements for Cryptographic Modules, to meet data encryption 
requirements.
f. Data Interoperability
This section provides recommended requirement language for guidance in defining data 
interoperability via industry standards, information systems architecture, and data architecture 
best practices. A tailored set of the following statements should be included as needed in RFPs 
and planning documents:
(1) Data is an essential enabler and should be made visible, accessible, and 
understandable to any potential user as early as possible in the program/project’s 
life cycle to support project and mission objectives as constrained by security and 
access needs. 
(2) Data assets should be made visible by creating and associating metadata 
(“tagging”), including, but not limited to, discovery metadata, for each asset.
(3) Developed metadata standards should comply with applicable national and 
international consensus standards for metadata interoperability; all metadata 
should be retrievable using the NASA Centers’ systems with requirements to 
access the metadata. 
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
81 of 217
(4) Data assets should be accessible by making data available in shared spaces; all 
data assets should be accessible to all users at the NASA Center except where 
limited by law, policy, or security classification.
(5) Data that is accessible to all users at the NASA Center should conform to that 
Center’s specified data publication methods that are consistent with the Center’s 
current and planned information systems capabilities.
(6) To enable trust, data assets should have associated information assurance and 
security metadata and an identified authoritative Contractor and/or Center-level 
source for the data.
(7) Data interoperability should be enabled through business and mission processes 
reusing the Center’s information system capabilities. 
(8) Semantic and structural agreements for data interoperability should be promoted 
through communities consisting of data users (producers and consumers) and 
system developers.
(9) Data interoperability concepts and practices should be incorporated into education 
and awareness training and Center-level processes.
(10) Programs/projects should acquire the minimum essential Contractor-originated 
data required to meet all program/project life-cycle requirements.
(11) Program/project managers and delegated Technical Authorities should consider 
data requirements for future procurement needs in a manner that fosters 
competitive procurement opportunities.
To allow for data interoperability, program/project managers and delegated Technical 
Authorities should ensure that Contractor data delivered to authoritative sources are acquired 
through the contract and that DRDs specify data to be delivered in specified digital data formats 
in lieu of “Contractor format acceptable” or similar language:
(1) Contracts should specify the required delivered data transaction scope, data 
delivery formats, metadata, naming standards, and data interoperability standards. 
The definition of data formats and transaction sets should be independent of the 
method of access or delivery.
(2) Regardless of the format of acquired data, the Contractor should mark any data 
provided with less than unlimited rights with the appropriate legend as set forth in 
FAR 52.227-14, Alternates II and III, Rights in Data—General.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
82 of 217
(3) Contractors should obtain approval from the NASA Center for all proposed 
contractual deviations from existing data standards and specifications.
Program/project managers and delegated Technical Authorities should ensure that data is 
acquired with sufficient access and usage rights to support the full range of program/project 
needs. This includes, but is not limited to, the following:
(1) The need for data to be used by organizations outside NASA (e.g. support 
Contractors and companies bidding on new procurements). 
(2) In instances when NASA acquires data with less than unlimited rights, the impact 
to the full program/project is to be assessed. 
(3) The Contracting Officer and the cognizant legal office should be consulted to 
develop a strategy to mitigate any adverse impacts associated with the limited or 
restricted data rights.
(4) Program/project managers and delegated Technical Authorities should include 
language in the statement of work to address the marking of data (e.g. “The 
Contractor should determine the data restriction that applies to each data 
deliverable and mark or transmit the data restriction in accordance with section 
X.X of the Data Procurement Document.”).
Incrementally define a:
(1) Common vocabulary to support each phase of the program/project life cycle as 
exit criteria for a program/project life-cycle phase.
(2) Common program/project data dictionary to support each phase of the 
program/project life cycle. This activity should be performed as program/project 
phase exit criteria to support the startup of the next phase.
(3) Common namespace standards to support each phase of the program/project life 
cycle as exit criteria for a program/project life-cycle phase.
If a NASA-/Center-level common vocabulary, common program/project data dictionary, or 
common namespace standard exists, then the contract should ensure that developed solutions use 
these common architecture elements.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
83 of 217
A.15 RECOMMENDED CONFIGURATION AND DATA MANAGEMENT
(CDM) STATEMENT OF WORK SECTIONS FOR CONTRACTS
(DRDs to be referenced/added as required)
A.15.1 CDM001
1. CONFIGURATION AND DATA MANAGEMENT
1.1 Configuration and Data Management Planning
1.1.1 The Contractor shall develop, deliver, and update a Configuration and Data 
Management Plan (CDMP) in accordance with DRD No. STD/CDMP.
1.1.2 The Contractor shall manage and coordinate all Contractor and subcontractor 
configuration and data management (CDM) activities.
1.1.3 The Contractor shall conduct all CDM activities for the contract in accordance with 
the approved CDMP.
1.1.4 The Contractor shall ensure that all subcontractors comply with the requirements of 
the CDMP and are integrated into the Contractor's CDM activities.
1.1.5 The Contractor shall conduct its CDM activities in accordance with GEIA-859, Data 
Management, SAE EIA-649-2, Configuration Management Requirements for NASA 
Enterprises, or a NASA [Enter Center]-approved equivalent, as tailored by the 
approved CDMP.
1.2 Configuration and Data Identification
1.2.1 The Contractor shall identify all recommended CIs that constitute the contractual end 
item and support system components for NASA’s review and approval during the 
conceptual level.
1.2.2 The Contractor shall uniquely identify all documents that disclose the performance, 
functional, and physical attributes for each of the approved CIs so that they may be 
accurately associated with the Configuration Baselines for these systems.
1.2.3 The Contractor shall utilize the Government’s Commercial and Government Entity
(CAGE) Code and supplied drawing formats and numbers ensuring Government’s 
unlimited data rights.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
84 of 217
1.3 Configuration and Data Baselines
1.3.1 The Contractor shall develop and maintain at least each of the following 
configuration and data baselines for each Mission System and the Support System 
during the contract:
a. Functional Baseline,
b. Allocated Baseline, and
c. Product Baseline.
1.4 Configuration and Data Control
1.4.1 The Contractor shall manage configuration and data changes and variations, 
including their:
a. Identification,
b. Process change requests and submit proposed engineering changes for 
evaluation and disposition by the appropriate Configuration and Data Approval 
Authority in accordance with DRD No. STD-CR,
c. For configuration changes only, classification as Major Changes or Minor 
Changes per SAE EIA-649-2,
d. Evaluation and coordination, and
e. Implementation and verification of the changes.
1.4.2 The Contractor shall submit change requests (CRs) supplemented by Engineering 
Change Proposals (ECPs) in accordance with the approved CDMP to implement 
changes to Approved Functional, Allocated, and Product Baselines.
1.4.3 All changes to a Functional Baseline shall be classified as a Major Change.
1.4.4 The Contractor shall classify changes to a Product Baseline as either a Major Change 
or a Minor Change.
1.4.5 The Contractor shall submit all proposed Major Changes to the Product Baseline to 
the NASA [Enter Center] Configuration Management Organization (CMO)
Representative for approval as CRs supplemented by ECPs.
1.4.6 The Contractor shall submit all proposed Minor Changes to the Product Baseline to 
the NASA [Enter Center] CMO Representative for review.
1.4.7 At the request of the NASA [Enter Center] CMO Representative, the Contractor shall 
resubmit a proposed Minor Change to the Product Baseline as a proposed Major 
Change to that Product Baseline in accordance with clause 1.4.5.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
85 of 217
1.4.8 The Contractor shall, for any proposed change to a Configuration or Data Baseline, 
ensure that all Configuration and Data Baselines will be mutually consistent and 
compatible.
1.5 Configuration Status Accounting
1.5.1 The Contractor shall establish and maintain, in accordance with the approved CDMP, 
a Configuration Status Accounting (CSA) system that correlates, stores, maintains,
and provides readily available views of all configuration information relating to the 
CIs’ components and their respective Configuration Baselines.
1.5.2 The Contractor shall provide all facilities and assistance reasonably required by the 
NASA [Enter Center] CDM Representative(s) for the NASA [Enter Center(s)] to 
access the Contractor's CSA system for the duration of the contract.
1.5.3 The Contractor shall deliver reports to the NASA [Enter Center] CDM 
Representative(s) from the Contractor's CSA system in accordance with DRD No. 
STD-CSA.
1.6 Configuration and Data Audits 
1.6.1 The Contractor shall develop, deliver, and update a Functional Configuration Audit 
(FCA) and Physical Configuration Audit (PCA) Documentation Plan in accordance 
with DRD No. STD-AD.
1.6.2 The Contractor shall conduct a Mandated System Review, the FCA, on each 
delivered CI.
1.6.3 The Contractor’s entry criteria, exit criteria, and objectives for FCA shall include 
those defined in SAE GEIA-HB-649, Configuration Management Standard 
Implementation Guide, or NASA-provided FCA template (e.g. DRD No. STD-AD).
1.6.4 The Contractor shall conduct a Mandated System Review, the PCA, on each 
delivered contractual end item and support system components.
1.6.5 The Contractor’s entry criteria, exit criteria, and objectives for PCA shall include 
those defined in SAE GEIA-HB-649 or NASA-provided FCA template.
1.6.6 The Contractor shall invite the NASA [Enter Center] Representative to witness all 
Materiel System FCAs and PCAs.
1.6.7 Unless otherwise notified in writing by the NASA [Enter Center] CDM 
Representative(s), the NASA [Enter Center] CDM Representative or appointed 
representative(s) shall witness configuration and data audits that are conducted for 
the purposes of acceptance.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
86 of 217
1.6.8 Unless the NASA [Enter Center] Representative has notified that it will not witness a 
configuration and data audit in accordance with clause 1.6.7, the Contractor shall not 
conduct that configuration and data audit in the absence of NASA [Enter Center] 
witnesses.
1.6.9 The Contractor shall plan for and support the NASA [Enter Center] CDM 
Representative(s) performing CDM Process Audits (CDMPA) in accordance with 
DRD No. STD-CDMPA. The [Enter Center] CDM Representative(s) will audit the 
Contractor’s and its Suppliers’ processes to ensure that each organization is 
compliant with the CDM requirements of the contract and that the configuration 
baselines are correctly defined, controlled, accounted for, and verified, and any 
required corrective actions resulting from CDMPAs are implemented.
1.7 Interface Control 
Note to Offeror: NASA [Enter Center] expects to manage the system interface design process 
through the Interface Control Working Group (ICWG) forum or prior agreed-to process.
Whenever possible, the Contractor is encouraged to liaise directly with third party Contractors 
and use the ICWG forum for final agreement or dispute resolution.
1.7.1 The Contractor shall conduct NASA [Enter Center]-sponsored Interface Control 
Working Groups (ICWGs) to establish and refine the Materiel System external 
interfaces and the platform integration and installation design.
1.7.2 The Contractor shall provide sufficient design information to the ICWG, including 
provision to third parties, to enable the interface details to be established.
1.7.3 The Contractor shall organize and conduct the ICWGs as extraordinary-/additional 
meetings in accordance with associated clauses for:
a. Each external interface identified.
b. Any other external interfaces identified during system design.
1.7.4 Membership of ICWGs shall include the NASA [Enter Center] CMO, the Contractor,
and the relevant interface [Enter Interface Name, e.g. Electrical Ground Support
System] Program Office.
1.7.5 The Contractor shall develop, deliver, and update a design document in accordance 
with DRD No. STD-MBx, detailing the interface design for each of the relevant 
external interfaces.
1.7.6 The Contractor shall submit the relevant draft design document detailing the 
interface design to the NASA [Enter Center] Representative prior to the ICWG.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
87 of 217
1.7.7 Unless otherwise agreed by the NASA [Enter Center] Representative, the Contractor 
shall obtain endorsement of the relevant design document detailing the interface 
design from each ICWG prior to Critical Design Reviews.
1.7.8 ICWGs shall be held at venues to be determined by the NASA [Enter Center] CMO.
Note to Tenderers: It is the NASA [Enter Center] CMO’s intention that ICWGs be held at 
[Enter Center].
1.7.9 The expected level of effort required by the Contractor is:
a. Attendance at approximately 12 ICWG meetings annually;
b. For each ICWG meeting, no more than five representatives of the Contractor 
will be required to attend; and
c. The maximum duration of each ICWG is expected to be no more than two days 
with one-day duration typical.
1.7.10 The Contractor acknowledges that no statements, representations, or undertaking by 
the ICWGs or any failings of the ICWGs to meet the requirements detailed above shall 
affect or undermine the Contractor's requirement to fulfil the Contract.
1.7.11 The parties agree to bear their own costs arising out of any level of effort in excess of 
the expected ICWG level of effort.
1.8 General
1.8.1 Contractor shall maintain engineering, manufacturing, and quality controls such that 
all items scheduled for delivery under this contract conform to the CDM requirements 
set forth below in this Clause. These requirements apply without limitation to each 
and every end item Contractor delivery to Government under this contract regardless 
of whether or not such item is a commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) item, catalog item, 
build-to-print item, Contractor-designed item, Government-designed item, or any 
combination thereof, etc. As a result thereof, Contractor is responsible for and these 
requirements apply without limitation to any and all items, parts, assemblies, COTS
items, catalog items, or any combination thereof, etc., that Contractor may include in 
the end item it delivers to Government under this contract.
1.8.2 Contractor shall, at any time after contract award, secure the written consent of 
Government prior to making any Major*
3
change to the item, if one or more of the 
following is affected:
a. The function, installation, item’s interfaces, or the physical or operational 
interchangeability of the item, reparable parts, and/or the spares support.
 
3 Refer to SAE EIA-649-2, section 3.3.3, Major and Minor Changes
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
88 of 217
b. Current applicable installation, operation, or other procedures with respect to 
the use thereof.
c. Certification(s) (e.g. Technical Standard Orders, Certificates of Conformance, 
Certificates of Compliance, etc.).
d. The specified requirements of performance, weight, safety, reliability, service 
life, and maintainability.
e. Delivered items (rework, replacement, or maintenance).
f. Qualification status (e.g. item does not meet original qualification requirements; 
or Contractor makes a change because of component obsolescence, productivity 
improvement, etc., that requires re-qualification).
1.8.3 Contractor shall give written notice to Government using DRD No. STD-CR or 
Government-approved Contractor’s change form, describing any proposed change as 
described in paragraph (1.8.2 above) in sufficient detail (including technical, cost, 
risk, and schedule impact analysis) to enable an understanding by Government of the 
total impact of the change. Supplemental documentation (exhibits, sketches, 
drawings, draft retrofit information, etc.) shall be included.
1.8.4 Government will, within 30 days after the receipt of such change request/proposal, 
advise Contractor of its consent to, its rejection of, or the status of the change under 
consideration. In no event shall Contractor proceed to incorporate such change into 
the items ordered by this contract prior to receipt of written consent from the 
Government.
1.8.5 A new Contractor part number identification shall be assigned to all items to be 
delivered to the Government when an approved Major change affects 
interchangeability.
1.8.6 Contractor shall have the right to make **
4 Minor changes under this contract, 
without obligation to make such changes in any delivered items, without an increase 
in price, and without prior approval, if the change does not affect any of the factors 
outlined in A.15.1, section 1.8.2. These changes shall require Government’s 
concurrence in classification.
1.8.7 Contractor shall make revisions to and furnish all data (MBx models, drawings, 
catalogs, technical manuals, etc.) submitted under this contract that are affected by 
any change.
1.8.8 Minor changes requiring concurrence in classification shall be submitted immediately 
to Government's Authorized Procurement Representative using DRD No. STD-CR or 
Government-approved Contractor's change form and revised data. These changes 
may be released at the same time for incorporation by Contractor at Contractor's 
facility. However, no changes shall be incorporated in the item within 30 days prior to 
the shipment to Government.
 
4 Refer to SAE EIA-649-2, section 3.3.3, Major and Minor Changes
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
89 of 217
Note: All changes incorporated in the item prior to Government's concurrence are done so at 
Contractor's risk (see 1.8.9).
1.8.9 After concurrence in the classification review of Contractor’s revised data, 
Government reserves the right to reclassify the change and return to Contractor for 
processing in accordance with A.15.1, sections 1.8.2 through 1.8.5. Contractor shall 
be notified within 30 days after receipt if Government rejects the change 
classification. No response denotes Government's concurrence.
1.8.10 [Enter Center/Program Form Number], Contractor Request for
Information/Clarification, is incorporated herein by reference. This form, or 
Government-approved Contractor equivalent, shall be used by Contractors to submit 
inquiries and/or request clarification.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
90 of 217
A.15.2 CDM002
CONFIGURATION AND DATA MANAGEMENT – COMPONENTS
These provisions shall apply to all qualified or qualifiable components ordered under this 
contract for delivery to Government or to Government's customers:
a. Contractor shall maintain configuration and data control of the design and 
manufacture of the components ordered hereunder, including, but not limited to, 
formal initial identification of the configuration of the components and controlled 
internal approval and accountability of changes to drawings, procedures, and other 
control documents.
b. Contractor shall give written notice to Government describing any proposed change 
to a component, including the effect of such proposed change, proposed by 
Contractor to be implemented subsequent to the establishment of the baseline 
component configuration. Changes include those affecting form, fit, or function of the 
component; changes to Contractor's drawings, procedures, and other control 
documents; changes involving a substitution of material; and changes in Governmentapproved manufacturing processes. Any such proposed change shall be submitted to 
Government's Authorized Procurement Representative for processing and review by 
Government.
c. A Contractor Certificate of Conformance shall be included with each shipment.
d. Contractor shall insert the substance of this clause in each lower-tier subcontract for 
functional components/parts.
e. Noncompliance with the change notification requirement of this clause may result in 
subsequent rejection of delivered items.
f. Contractor shall be responsible for all reasonable costs incurred by Government or 
Government's customers as a result of Contractor's failure to comply with the 
provisions of this clause.
g. Nothing contained in this clause shall excuse Contractor from performing in strict 
compliance with the terms, conditions, delivery schedule, specifications, or any other 
provision of this contract.
h. In the event of conflict between this clause and any other provision of this contract, 
the conflict shall be resolved by Government's Authorized Procurement 
Representative.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
91 of 217
Reference Only
The following DRDs are cited in the above clauses and thereby form part of these contractual 
requirements:
a. STD-CDMP
b. STD-CR
c. STD-CSA
d. STD-AD
e. STD-CDMPA
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
92 of 217
APPENDIX B
DATA ACQUISITION CONTRACT LANGUAGE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION PAGE
1. Objective ............................................................................................................... #
2. Background .......................................................................................................... #
3. Lessons Learned................................................................................................... #
4. Needs Assessment.................................................................................................
4.1 Digital Data Standardization..................................................................................
4.2 Digital Definition and Interoperability Requirements........................................... #
4.3 Data Acquisition .................................................................................................... #
4.4 Data Rights ............................................................................................................ #
4.5 Request for Proposals (RFP) Language................................................................. #
4.6 Procurement Information Circular (PIC)............................................................... #
4.7 Training.................................................................................................................. #
4.8 Proprietary Data and Intellectual Data Rights....................................................... #
5. Contract Language .............................................................................................. #
5.1 Data Management Plan.......................................................................................... #
5.2 Data Rights ............................................................................................................ #
5.3 Data Protection and Access ................................................................................... #
5.4 Data Requirements................................................................................................. #
5.4.1 Proprietary Formatted Data ................................................................................... #
5.4.2 Structured Digital Data from a Source Repository................................................ #
5.4.3 Document Formatted Data..................................................................................... #
5.5 Metadata................................................................................................................. #
5.6 Data Transmittal .................................................................................................... #
5.6.1 View Data in Contractor System ........................................................................... #
5.6.2 Direct Entry to NASA System............................................................................... #
5.6.3 Upload to NASA File Repository.......................................................................... #
5.6.4 System-to-System Connection............................................................................... #
5.6.5 Secured Transmittal ............................................................................................... #
5.7 Viewing Data ......................................................................................................... #
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
93 of 217
TABLE OF CONTENTS (Continued)
SECTION PAGE
5.7.1 Search..................................................................................................................... #
5.7.2 Browsing and Navigation ...................................................................................... #
5.7.3 Viewing and Archiving Data ................................................................................. #
5.8 Stored Data ............................................................................................................ #
5.9 Technical Data Package Definitions...................................................................... #
5.9.1 Unpackaged Data................................................................................................... #
5.10 Workflow and Notifications .................................................................................. #
5.10.1 Notifications........................................................................................................... #
5.10.2 Digital Signatures .................................................................................................. #
5.10.3 Change Log............................................................................................................ #
5.11 Administration and Other System Functions......................................................... #
5.11.1 Administration ....................................................................................................... #
5.11.2 User Profile Data ................................................................................................... #
5.11.3 Authentication and Security................................................................................... #
5.12 Integration with Other Information Systems......................................................... #
5.12.1 Data Decomposition .............................................................................................. #
5.12.2 Transfer of Data to [Identify Name] System ......................................................... #
5.12.3 Retrieval of Current Data from [Identify Name] Systems..................................... #
5.13 Non-Functional Requirements............................................................................... #
5.13.1 Availability ............................................................................................................ #
5.13.2 Flexibility............................................................................................................... #
5.13.3 Software Integration .............................................................................................. #
5.13.4 Platforms................................................................................................................ #
5.13.5 Security .................................................................................................................. #
5.13.6 Network ................................................................................................................. #
5.13.7 Integrity.................................................................................................................. #
5.13.8 Scalability .............................................................................................................. #
6. Conclusion ............................................................................................................ #
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
94 of 217
1. Objective
The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Office of the Chief Information 
Officer (OCIO), led by the Technology and Innovation (T&I) Division, proposes data 
requirements language for contracts intended to enable effective interaction and utilization of 
contractor-generated data and information. Introduction of such requirements language ensures 
that data acquisitions are appropriately included into NASA contracts, guaranteeing the 
government does not lose data, information, or knowledge that has been produced during the 
contract and, ultimately, lowering cost and effort for both parties. T&I proposes new contracts
that treat data as a valuable asset and structure data-related deliverables in formats that can be 
shared, regardless of whether a determination has been made as to whether the data should be 
made available to the public.
NASA should acquire the minimum, essential contractor-originated data required to meet all 
program life-cycle requirements. Every attempt should be made to integrate all functional 
specialties, e.g., safety, reliability, quality, logistics, test and verification, etc., to minimize data 
acquisition redundancies and inconsistencies. This integrated effort must include sub-projects 
within the various programs. The requirement to deliver and manage data in a digital 
environment influences the manner in which data delivery requirements are levied on existing 
and future contracts. Ongoing contracts should consider contract modifications to require the 
delivery and management of contractually delivered data in a digital environment on contracts.
The purpose of this Appendix is to provide specific data requirements language to supplement 
the existing FAR and NASA FAR Supplement (NFS) clauses. This document provides guidance, 
templates and specific language to enable data integrity, and control and access during and after 
the contract is awarded.
2. Background
Historically, NASA procurements have overall included very little, if any, data language in 
contracts to provide the Government readily available access to information produced during 
contract periods or when transferred after expiration of the period of performance (PoP). The 
one exception is large programs, and even they have incurred large and often unexpected costs 
when transferring data to the Government at contract end. This has forced NASA organizations 
to negotiate with contractors on access during the contract period and the transfer of data at 
contract end. This has resulted in higher overall costs because the Government essentially does 
not benefit in tradition procurement terms by allowing the competition of bidders against each 
other. When contractors turn over data at contract end, they often levy large data conversion 
costs along with the transfer overheads making the cost of the process higher than expected. 
Often, contractors will classify data as primarily proprietary or intellectual property during the 
contract, making any negotiations tougher due to the difficulty of defining who really owns the 
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
95 of 217
data. This puts the Government at a disadvantage when trying to negotiate after the contract has 
been signed. 
In an effort to compile the appropriate contract language to ensure data are protected throughout 
the contract and transferred as required at contract end, the team met with both contractor and 
civil servant subject matter experts (SMEs) from many previous and existing NASA Programs
and institutional and engineering/science organizations. The team summarized lessons learned
and documented significant risks and appropriate mitigations with the end goal of developing 
draft language for consideration and use in future contracts. The draft language will have the 
appropriate reviews with Legal, Procurement, and appropriate SMEs. 
In this effort, the team reviewed and referred to a considerable amount of previously developed 
white papers and documentation. The team also researched NASA wide for other material and 
found a significant amount of information concerning data and information available from the 
NASA Earth Science program. In addition, the NASA Earth Science program developed a Data 
and Information Policy accessible at http://science.nasa.gov/earth-science/earth-sciencedata/data-information-policy/, which provided the team valuable information and associated 
contract language. The team reviewed and utilized language from the Earth Science program, 
which promotes the full and open sharing of all data with the research and applications 
communities, private industry, academia, and the general public. The greater the availability of 
the data5
, the more quickly and effectively the user communities can utilize the information to 
address basic Earth science questions and provide the basis for developing innovative practical 
applications to benefit the general public. 
3. Lessons Learned
Given the advances in technology over recent decades, it becomes necessary to investigate new, 
more efficient approaches and business practices to achieve reasonable governmental access to 
data while simultaneously minimizing cost impacts associated with such requests. 
Numerous lessoned learned were identified while looking into the Space Shuttle Program (SSP), 
International Space Station (ISS), Launch Services Program (LSP), and various other contracts 
associated with Commercial Crew, Constellation, Orion, and others. The primary lesson learned 
was if one simply omits data requirements in a contract, access to the data during the contract 
and at contract end would then become only attainable at additional cost. Inclusion of tailored, 
template contract language can aide in this regard and ensure critical data access and integrity for 
the lifespan of the particular record. 
 
5 For purposes of this document, the term data will be used to cover data, information, and knowledge stored in an 
information system.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
96 of 217
The SSP had numerous issues associated with data over the 30-year program. Data media varied 
from paper, to microfiche, to digital, making delivery, translation, and/or reuse a significant cost 
and effort. Additionally, the SSP did not have the data stewardship to ensure that downstream 
records management could be effectively and efficiently implemented. Security classifications 
for much of the documentation were not considered at the beginning for items such as export 
control—sensitive but unclassified (SBU), International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR), 
etc. As such, huge amounts of backlogged data could not be dispositioned.
The SSP design data and drawings were not contractual deliverables and, in most instances, were 
further complicated by multiple designs for various systems being developed across the program. 
This resulted in reference material not being available to multiple Centers across the program.
For the SSP, the resulting theme is the program neither defined nor added contract language to 
obtain data at the end of the contract, resulting in millions of dollars spent researching and 
obtaining data. 
The ISS program continues to maintain multiple data systems for parts accounting, disposition, 
management, etc., because not one of their current systems can provide all functionality required;
and the form of data does not lend itself to a single management system.
Both the SSP and ISS programs were stuck with huge balloon payments to purchase proprietary 
code that was required to run and maintain software systems formerly contractor owned and run. 
Without this code, the data would be unusable or require expensive conversion.
The ISS Payload Processing Contractor was asked at the end-of-contract to turn over SSP work 
procedures at contract closeout. These work procedures were developed during the contract and 
were to be turned over to the incoming contractor; however, the contractor deemed many of the 
subject procedures to contain “trade secrets,” making them proprietary. As such, many of the 
procedures developed during the life of the Payload Processing Contracts were never obtained 
and/or turned over. Again, the foresight to identify data required at end-of-contract was never 
considered at the beginning of the contract, or the contract specified the “best available data”
that, while seeming the most economic path, turned out proprietary.
The trend of moving from cost plus contracts to performance-based contracts, in many cases,
encouraged contractors to develop and use their own data systems while NASA counterparts 
became further disengaged in day-to-day activities. This continuing trend to convert more 
contracts to fixed price can further acerbate the issue of obtaining data as well as the possibility 
of more intellectual property being owned by the contractor. 
The LSP, with the contract strategy of fixed price contracts to further reduce contract cost, has 
chosen to accept “existing contractor data” to the maximum extent possible. This strategy,
although seeming the most cost effective, may become costly in the event the Government has a
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
97 of 217
need to obtain the data at contract end or any time during the contract if specific contract 
language does not address this data at the inception of the contract.
The Commercial Crew Program (Commercial Crew Development) is proceeding with very little 
data deliverables resulting in only the interfaces or interface control documents (ICDs) available 
and only available for describing identified interfaces such as known touch points and enabling 
determination of safety assurance.
A recent OCIO contract has contract language stating “all Contractor-developed applications 
shall be owned by NASA and fully transferable, including source code and documentation, to a 
new vendor at the conclusion of contract.”
In summary, data standards vary across NASA programs from no standards to various attempts 
to establish a standard. Most program managers in the past have had the perception that data will 
cost a lot of money resulting in data not addressed in most contracts, or data deliverables were 
removed during one of the many cost-cutting exercises. The most efficient and least expensive 
method of obtaining data is to include achievable requirements in the RFP or front end of the 
contract. Any end-of-contract changes will cost significantly more to obtain data.
4. Needs Assessment
The purpose of the needs assessment was to determine the high-level requirements associated 
with data acquisitions and whether the existing problems associated with data acquisitions are 
Agency wide or program specific. The needs assessment report is used to develop the future 
contract language and to enhance its effectiveness. The needs assessment was performed through 
surveys and focus group discussions. The key findings follow.
4.1 Digital Data Standardization
Digital data standardization, regardless of the file or data format used, is needed for all data 
deliverables. As such, future procurement solicitations are to address and place emphasis on, but 
not limit to, the following categories and include as deliverables along with addressing “how to”
accomplish them within the SOW and other sections of the RFP:
a. Ensure consistency of data and data use across systems.
b. Ensure minimal redundant data collection and entry.
c. Ensure maximum utilization of relevant technology.
d. Ensure audit trail accessibility.
e. Ensure rapid retrieval of audit trail information for change processing.
f. Ensure effective analysis of metrics.
g. Ensure improved data acquisition time lines.
h. Ensure improved data review and integration.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
98 of 217
Digital data standardization is considered and required when the following program requirements 
exist:
a. The potential for reuse of data in compliance with Office of the Federal Chief 
Information Officer’s Memorandum for the Heads of Executive Departments and 
Agencies M-13-13, Open Data Policy, in accordance with internal data clearance 
processes for release to public.
b. A need exists for interoperability of standardized data among Centers, academia, 
industry, platforms, and contractors/programs.
c. The need to provide relationships between data for performing program management, 
systems engineering, and operational functions.
d. Contract closeout.
4.2 Data Definition and Interoperability Requirements
NASA must provide data definition and interoperability requirements written into program 
contracts to leverage a data-centric approach for digital asset data management. The 
requirements should be defined by NASA policies that generate content for inclusion in NASA 
Request for Quotes (RFQs), Request for Information (RFI), and Request for Proposals (RFPs) 
templates and preparation handbooks.
4.3 Data Acquisition 
NASA must provide data acquisition requirements to enable the reference and reuse of data 
through a Program's full life cycle. These data acquisition requirements should be present during 
RFP/RFQ development to establish integrated data architecture for a Program's information 
systems architecture (ISA), data architecture (DA), and Information Systems (IS) capability 
roadmap. The ability to meet data exchange requirements should be a part of the contract 
performance metrics that the contractor must report on and be evaluated on throughout contract 
execution.
4.4 Data Rights
NASA must ensure access to technical data (recorded information used to define a design and to 
produce, support, maintain, or operate a system). This is critical to life-cycle sustainment of a 
system. Critical decisions made early in the acquisition process address data needs over the 
entire life cycle of the system.
It is critical for the contractor to assess long-term data rights requirements and corresponding 
acquisition strategies prior to initiating a response for proposal to acquire systems, subsystems, 
or end items to ensure they provide for rights, access, or delivery of technical data that the 
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
99 of 217
Government requires for systems' total life-cycle sustainment. Furthermore, the delivery of 
technical data and associated rights at reviews and documentation of the strategy in the 
Information Support Plan and associated data planning documents should also be addressed.
NASA must ensure science data is retrieved and accessible for open sharing. Science data 
products include data sets generated by the project that include the science data itself, associated 
ancillary data, and aircraft navigation data. The contractor must summarize all science data 
products to be generated and documentation for correct and independent use of the data. The 
expected range of use to be supported by this documentation should be indicated. Some types of 
data sets that should be considered for inclusion are:
 Metadata,
 Low-level processed data,
 High-level processed data,
 Scientific results,
 Science algorithm source code,
 Algorithm theoretical basic documents (ATBDs),
 Data quality documentation.
4.5 Request for Proposal (RFP) Language
There are several areas of the RFP that need language to ensure program data acquisition 
downstream. In addition, creating a template that includes both prescriptive language and 
guidance for organizations to describe their data and how they want to access it, allows the 
organization to customize their instructions to the potential Offerors. Specific sections of the 
RFP include:
a. SOW – This is where the functional and technical requirements reside within the 
contract package, typically within Section C of the government request package. The 
requirements will include the types of data the government identifies for use 
throughout the life of the contract, how they want to access data, and the process of 
transferring the data at contract end. The Offeror provides this information in their 
proposal; however, the information may not be explicit in the contract, but rather is 
contained within the DRD (Data Requirements Description).
b. DRD – In this case the DRD is a template that requests details for the information that 
was requested in the SOW. It must be submitted with their proposal. The Offeror 
should provide the same approach to handling Data as they submitted in their 
proposal. This remains in the contract within the DRD. Contracting Officers, not 
always but often, will go to the SOW as the rules of the contract, often at the expense 
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
100 of 217
of the DRD. They expect to see the rules in the SOW. For this reason, it needs to be 
in both places.
c. Cost Volume – The cost of maintaining data in a centralized place, making it 
accessible to the government, and then transferring the information at contract end 
has a price tag that is always more than expected. To get the best price, the cost must 
be set at contract start. To achieve this, the Offerors must submit their cost to the cost 
volume as a separate line item. This sets the cost at contract start because the cost 
volume is in the contract. This will be critical for fixed-price contracts.
4.6 Procurement Information Circular (PIC)
To have the data requirement pushed to all NASA procurements that have data requirements 
(e.g. not hardware or software purchases), a PIC needs to be put in place so all the Contracting 
Officers understand the data language requirement. The PIC directs them to include it (if it 
requires data) into each Procurement. They will provide the requirement to the board chairs. The 
Contracting Officer will not be responsible for understanding the requirements or implementing 
them. That will be the responsibility of the chair/board member assigned to the action. A 
document with guidelines and the prescriptive language of how and when to use the data 
language will accompany the PIC. 
4.7 Training
Each Center needs to appoint a point of contact from their Chief Information Officer’s (CIO’s)
office that can work with the boards to guide them through the process. Each POC needs training 
on the process before working with the boards.
4.8 Proprietary Data and Intellectual Data Rights
NASA recognizes the right of suppliers to create and maintain a competitive advantage. 
However, NASA seeks access to or acquisition of relevant data for efficiency and safety reasons. 
Proprietary data and intellectual data rights must be addressed to the extent the contractor cannot 
label data as proprietary to avoid data sharing. NASA seeks to explore ways to access the 
necessary data while still respecting the interests of the suppliers. This language is legal in nature 
and therefore needs to be provided by Legal and Procurement.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
101 of 217
5. Contract Language6
NASA shall ensure that contractor data delivered to a single authoritative source is acquired 
through contract, and that Data Requirements Descriptions (DRDs) specify data to be delivered 
in specified electronic data formats, in lieu of “contractor format acceptable” or similar 
language. Contracts shall specify the required delivered data transaction scope, data delivery 
formats, metadata, naming standards, and data exchange standards. The definition of data 
formats and transaction sets shall be independent of the method of access or delivery. 
Regardless of the format of acquired data, the contractor shall mark data provided with less than 
unlimited rights with the appropriate legend as set forth in FAR 52.227-14, Alternates II and III. 
See the following sections for specific language for all contracts.
5.1 Model-Based Enterprise (MBE) Plan
The Contractor shall provide an MBE Plan to be approved by the Government for all contracts 
requiring data7
deliverables. The MBE Plan will be used to document the data management 
infrastructure that will be put in place throughout the contract and provide periodic reporting of 
the data produced by the contract. Refer to Appendix J.
5.2 Data Rights8
NASA shall obtain and maintain appropriate data rights for all data produced by the Contractor 
to be provided to NASA during and at Contract end. NASA shall address intellectual property 
rights on an individual basis in conjunction with Procurement and Legal Offices.
Contract language should include following:
“The [Agency] owns the rights to all data and records produced as part of this contract. All 
deliverables under the contract are the property of the U.S. Government for which [Agency] shall 
have unlimited rights to use, dispose of, or disclose such data contained therein as it determines 
to be in the public interest. Any Contractor rights in the data or deliverables must be identified as 
required by 48 CFR § 52.227-11, Patent Rights-Ownership by the Contractor; 48 CFR § 52-227-
12, Reserved; 48 CFR § 52-227-13, Patent Rights-Ownership by the Government; 48 CFR § 
52.227-14, Alternates II and III, Rights in Data—General; 48 CFR § 52-227-15, Representation 
 
6 This section contains each of the categories and requirements associated with Data Management in contracts. The 
intent is to choose each category and specific requirement(s) that applies to the contract’s use of data. Contracts 
that have science or engineering as a core competency tend to use the data differently and have different 
requirements that need to be reflected in the SOW. The individual requirements found in these sections should be 
viewed as options to be selected as they apply to the contract and use them as appropriate to develop your SOW.
7 The term “data” will be used throughout this section to cover the terms data, information, and knowledge.
8
Issuer’s legal organization should be part of standard review process, including all specific binding language.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
102 of 217
of Limited Rights Data and Restricted Computer Software; 48 CFR § 52.227-16, Additional 
Data Requirements; 48 CFR § 52-227-17, Rights in Data-Special Works; 48 CFR § 52-227-18, 
Rights in Data-Existing Works; 48 CFR § 52-227-19, Commercial Computer Software License; 
and 48 CFR § 52.227-20, Rights in Data-SBIR Program.”
Flow down of requirements to subcontractors:
1. “The Contractor shall incorporate the substance of this clause, its terms and 
requirements including this paragraph, in all subcontracts under this [contract 
vehicle], and require written subcontractor acknowledgment of same.
2. Violation by a subcontractor of any provision set forth in this clause will be attributed 
to the Contractor.”
Regarding Federal Acquisition Regulations (FARs):
Government personnel preparing agreements (e.g. RFIs, SOWs, PWS, etc.) need to understand 
the distinction between:
1. FAR parts and subparts that are guidance and direction to the Government and FAR 
Clauses, and 
2. FAR Parts and Subparts incorporated by Reference, that are Contractually binding 
upon the Contractor and the Government.
Regarding the term “Data Rights,” which is often used to refer to the Government’s licensing
rights in two major categories of valuable intellectual property:
1. Technical Data (TD) includes any recorded information of a scientific or technical 
nature (e.g. product design or maintenance data, and computer software 
documentation (CSD)).
2. Computer software (CS) includes executable code, source code, code listings, design 
details, processes, flow charts, and related material.
An Intellectual Property Strategy needs to be developed early to help program/project 
management to ensure that all TD, CS, and associated license rights required for procurement 
and sustainment of a system are available throughout the system’s life cycle.
1. Sustainment activities include re-bid/procurement, maintenance, repair, modifications 
or interfacing/interoperability activities, and upgrades or technology insertion.
2. A priced option may be used to address uncertainty regarding data deliverables or 
data rights that may be needed in the future but that are not ordered up front.
3. The deferred delivery clause (DFARS 252.227-7026, Deferred Delivery of Technical 
Data or Computer Software) and necessary CDRLs are used to delay delivery, when 
the specific data requirements are known, until the Government determines when the 
data deliverables should be provided.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
103 of 217
4. The deferred ordering clause (DFARS 252.227-7027, Deferred Ordering of Technical 
Data or Computer Software) is used to delay the ordering of data generated in the 
performance of a contract until the Government determines what and when additional 
data is needed.
5. The Data Accession List (DAL) is a useful tool to facilitate deferred ordering.
Data deliverables and data rights issues may be identified and resolved by:
1. Requiring Offerors to assert all restrictions on deliverable TD and CS–both 
commercial and noncommercial–up front, in their proposals,
2. Evaluating the data deliverables and data rights being offered, and
3. Negotiating for mutually agreeable special license rights where standard license 
categories do not meet both parties’ needs.
The Government’s license rights to a contractor’s TD and CS generally depend upon the extent 
to which the Government funded the development of the technology, whether the technology is 
commercial or noncommercial, and any negotiations for mutually agreeable “special” license 
agreements. Some types of data qualify for Unlimited Rights regardless of development funding 
source such as “form, fit, and function (FFF) data” and data necessary for operation, 
maintenance, installation, and training (OMIT) purposes (excluding detailed manufacturing and 
process data).
The FAR clauses do not by default require delivery of TD or CS–the Government must include 
specific delivery requirements in each contract (refer to Table 3, Specific Contract Delivery 
Requirements). Mere access may not protect the Government’s interests. Consider a priced 
option when needs for data delivery or data rights are uncertain.
Table 3—Specific Contract Delivery Requirements
Rights 
Category
Applies to 
These Types 
of TD or CS
Rights Criteria Permitted Uses 
Within the 
Government
Permitted Uses 
by Third Parties 
Outside the 
Government1
Unlimited 
Rights (UR)
Noncommercial 
TD and CS
Developed exclusively at 
Government expense, and 
certain types of data (e.g., 
FFF, OMIT, CSD)
All uses; no restrictions
Government 
Purpose 
Rights (GPR)
Noncommercial 
TD and CS
Developed with mixed 
funding
All uses; no restrictions For “Government 
Purposes” only; no 
commercial use1
Limited 
Rights (LR)
Noncommercial 
TD only
Developed exclusively at 
private expense
Unlimited; except may 
not be used for 
manufacture
Emergency repair 
or overhaul1,2
Restricted 
Rights (RR)
Noncommercial 
CS only
Developed exclusively at 
private expense
Only one computer at a 
time; minimum backup 
copies; modification3
Emergency repair/
overhaul; certain 
service/maintenance
contracts1,2 
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
104 of 217
Specifically 
Negotiated 
License 
Rights
Any/all TD and 
CS – including 
commercial TD 
and CS
Mutual agreement of the 
parties; use whenever the 
standard categories do not 
meet both parties’ needs
As negotiated by the parties; however, must not 
be less than LR in noncommercial TD and must 
not be less that RR in noncommercial CS 
(consult with legal counsel as other limits apply)
SBIR Data 
Rights
Noncommercial 
TD and CS
All TD or CS generated 
under an SBIR contract
The equivalent of Unlimited Rights (UR) in 
OMIT and FFF data; the equivalent of Limited 
Rights (LR) in all other delivered TD; the 
equivalent of Restricted Rights (RR) in CS
Commercial 
TD License 
Rights
Commercial TD 
only
TD related to commercial 
items (developed 
exclusively at private 
expense)4
The equivalent of Unlimited Rights (UR) in 
OMIT and FFF data; the equivalent of Limited 
Rights (LR) in all other delivered TD
Commercial 
CS Licenses
Commercial CS 
only
Any commercial CS or 
CS documentation
As specified in the commercial license 
customarily offered to the public5
1 All third party use under Government’s license is subject to Government authorization. For rights categories other than UR, 
releases or disclosures to third parties must be accompanied by either the Non-Disclosure Agreement (NDA) from 48 CFR § 
227.7103-7, Use and Non-disclosure Agreement, or must occur under a contract containing 48 CFR § 252.227-7025, Limitations 
on the Use or Disclosure of Government-Furnished Information Marked with Restrictive Legends. A notice requirement also 
applies to releases of LR data and RR software.
2
In addition to footnote 1, NDA and notice requirements, all authorized Covered Government Support Contractors with access to 
LR data or RR software must sign an NDA directly with the owner of the data/software, if required by the owner.
3 See 48 CFR § 252.227-7014(a), Rights in Noncommercial Computer Software and Noncommercial Computer Software 
Documentation, for more information.
4 Commercial items are presumed to have been developed exclusively at private expense, except in the case of major systems 
[see 48 CFR § 227.7103-13(c)(2), Government Right to Review, Verify, Challenge, and Validate Asserted Restrictions, and 48 CFR § 
252.227-7037(b), Validation of Restrictive Markings on Technical Data]. However, when the Government has paid for any 
portion of development, then the noncommercial TD clause (48 CFR § 252.227-7013, Rights in technical data - Noncommercial 
items) is used for TD pertaining to those portions, and the commercial TD clause 48 CFR § 252.227-7015, Technical data -
Commercial items, is used for TD relating to the portions developed exclusively at private expense [48 CFR § 227.7103-6(a), 
Contract Clauses].
5 Such licenses must be consistent with Federal procurement law and satisfy user needs. 
5.3 Data Protection and Access
The contractor shall provide secure storage and protection of the data, information, and 
knowledge that have been developed by the contract, including historical data. All data will be 
backed up every 30 days at a minimum.
The contractor shall provide access of the data, information, and knowledge that have been 
developed by the contract, including historical data, to the Government throughout the life of the 
contract and at the termination of the contract. [State the requirement]. The contractor shall 
ensure that information is collected in a way that supports downstream processing, and that 
systems are built to support interoperability and information accessibility, including regular 
access or exporting of the data as a standard requirement of such systems.
The contractor shall provide public access to the data [State the requirement] as approved by the 
Government. The contractor will use the approved internal clearance processes established by 
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
105 of 217
the agency OCIO in compliance with the Open Data Policy-Managing Information as an Asset 
(M-13-13).
The contractor shall provide the capability to support [State the number or classification] users. 
The access includes [define access, usage, and storage capacity]
Any contractor-developed applications, funded by the contractor, shall be owned by NASA and 
fully transferable, including source code and documentation, to a new vendor at the end of this 
contract as deemed necessary by the Government.
The contractor and Government will meet [State the number] days prior to the end of the contract 
to determine the schedule for transferring the data, information, and knowledge to the 
Government. At the end of the contract, all data, information, and knowledge shall be transferred 
to the Government.
The contractor shall protect all data produced by the contract in accordance with the IT security 
policies and procedures in NASA Policy Directive (NPD) 2810.1, NASA Information Security 
Policy.
5.4 Data Requirements
5.4.1 Proprietary Formatted Data
The following applies to data that is generated on a COTS or a custom-built application where 
the application’s data format is proprietary to those systems:
The Contractor shall provide a definition of the application and version that produced the file. 
The Contractor shall provide the native proprietary file itself.
The Contractor shall provide a commonly readable representation of the file approved by the 
Government [Agency] (e.g. JPG, GIF, PNG, or PDF/A).
For file types where there is no commonly readable representation of the file, and with the 
concurrence of the NASA Contracting Officer’s Representative, the Contractor shall deliver the 
application (source code and executable) required to read the native file format.
5.4.2 Structured Digital Data from a Source Repository
The following applies to digital data extraction from a source data repository provided in a 
computer-readable format that maintains the referential integrity of the data:
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
106 of 217
The Contractor shall provide structured, computer-readable data, including all relationships 
between data, as follows:
The Contractor shall implement an architecture that complies with the applicable NASA IT 
Standards and enables digital data sharing within NASA Agency domains, [State the specific 
standard]. Examples include: W3C XML, W3C Namespaces for XML, and W3C XML Schema 
for XML data.
The Contractor shall respond to Government requests for IT data items via [State Specific 
Formats]. Examples include: W3C XML, W3C XML Namespaces, W3C XML Schema, and 
OMG XMI for Models for XML data.
The Contractor shall ensure digital data descriptions are usable, and all producers and consumers 
of digital data shall reference a common data dictionary as defined by NASA for standard XML 
[or state other] data. If a NASA standard is not applicable or available, digital data should 
reference a common data dictionary as defined by the Contractor.
The Contractor shall ensure a database output format is provided (e.g. SQL output).
The Contractor shall ensure structured database output files include the database type and 
version (e.g. MySQL, version 5.5.1).
The Contractor shall provide computer-readable definitions of record structure (schema) for both 
XML and database output formats.
5.4.3 Document Formatted Data9
The following applies to documents created in text processing applications:
The Contractor shall ensure data delivered in digital form is provided in text-searchable PDF/A
(rather than scanned or raster PDF), or Microsoft® Word® and Microsoft® Excel® files [State 
any other formats].
The Contractor shall obtain NASA approval prior to digital data delivery of an item not meeting 
standard formats listed above (e.g. .txt, .rtf).
 
9
It is critical to appropriately include examples of formats typical to the business area.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
107 of 217
5.5 Metadata
Metadata shall be defined in a machine-readable data format to support automation and to 
facilitate data exchange. Metadata should be cataloged and published for reuse by all program 
teams to facilitate proper data exchange.
The Contractor shall ensure metadata is based on latest NASA-approved industry standard such 
as, but not limited to, Comma Separated Value (CSV) or Extensible Markup Language (XML) 
format and consistent with requirements defined in the Structured Digital Data section.
The Contractor shall obtain NASA approval for fully documented, standards-based formats not 
listed above (e.g. embedded PDF documents).
The Contractor shall ensure metadata is delivered with the file to which it is related and will 
reference the filename or other identifying features (e.g. timestamp).
The Contractor shall apply the International Standards Organization (ISO) 10303-233, Industrial 
automation systems and integration - Product data representation and exchange - Part 233: 
Application protocol: Systems engineering, as a foundation for defining common program 
metadata.
The Contractor shall apply the International Standards Organization (ISO) 10303-239, Industrial 
automation systems and integration - Product data representation and exchange - Part 239: 
Application protocol: Product life cycle support, for common systems engineering metadata.
The Contractor shall ensure metadata used during a program phase is defined 90 days prior to its 
first use.
5.6 Data Transmittal
Data will be transmitted to NASA via one of the options in sections 5.6.1 through 5.6.5, as 
defined in each data requirements description and RFP/SOW.
5.6.1 View Data in Contractor System
The Contractor shall support viewing data within the Contractor’s electronic system in a format 
readable by a standard Government workstation or otherwise approved by NASA. This action 
will be deemed as a delivery of data in-place, and such data will be maintained within the 
Contractor’s system.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
108 of 217
5.6.2 Direct Entry to NASA System
The Contractor shall include direct user entry of data into a NASA-owned system, including 
fields, values, or other information as required by the NASA system.
5.6.3 Upload to NASA File Repository
The Contractor shall include uploading files, whether document-formatted data, or structured 
data (e.g. SQL output), and filling any associated data as defined by the required formats (above) 
and the file repository, including Center, project, or other repository as specified in the data 
requirements descriptions.
5.6.4 System-to-System Connection
The Contractor shall provide an automated capability to pass computer-readable data between a 
Contractor and NASA system and across Contractor and Agency firewalls, via one of several 
mechanisms, including:
a. Restful Application Programming Interface (API) or Web APIs (interface defined 
mutually by NASA and Contractor). 
b. APIs supported by middleware, e.g. SOAP API.
c. Fully documented standards-based API supported by Contractor tools to be approved 
by NASA.
5.6.5 Secured Transmittal
The Contractor shall encrypt sensitive information during transmission.
The Contractor shall utilize the Government standards (NIST 800 Series Publications) to meet 
data encryption requirements.
5.7 Viewing Data
In case of data stored in the Contractor systems, the Contractor shall provide online 
access/search to the data.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
109 of 217
5.7.1 Search
Each Offeror/Contractor must respond/provide search criteria as stated in the SOW. Examples
are:
a. The Contractor shall provide a public search capability that allows external visitors to 
search across all publicly available NASA Web content.
b. The Contractor shall prevent public search users from gaining access to accesscontrolled content.
c. Keyword-based search, similar to Web-based search engines like Google™, shall 
retrieve the term entered where found among the metadata and unpackaged data.
d. The Contractor shall ensure the following search functions are available [choose as 
required]:
(1) The system search function shall support the use of wild cards, case sensitivity 
selection, and phrase definition (i.e. the use of quotations around multi-word 
phrases to specify that the words in the phrase collectively constitute a single 
search term).
(2) The system shall support the use of Boolean operators (AND, OR, NOT) to allow 
the user to search based on multiple criteria.
(3) The system shall index and return the contents of attached text-searchable 
documents (based on the indexers available for various document types).
(4) The system shall provide a field-based filter that returns all the records that 
contain the value(s) in only that field.
(5) The filter shall support searching for multiple values in a single field (e.g. part 
number = #X AND #Y) as well as multiple fields (title contains “ding” AND part 
number = #X AND #Y).
e. All the metadata fields listed in section [State Section] of this document shall be 
available as criteria for filtering.
f. Search performance shall be sufficiently high to return search results within [Insert 
Number] seconds after a query is submitted.
g. If a complete search results set cannot be returned within [Insert Number] seconds, 
the system shall present results as they become available.
h. Results for a keyword (or key phrase) search shall provide context related for each 
result, including the name of the item, record, document, or package where the keyword was 
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
110 of 217
found, the date last modified, the field or section where the keyword was found, and up to 25 
words of text that immediately surround the keyword.
i. The system shall suggest correct spellings or other probable search terms when a 
common typographical error or misspelling appears in a keyword search.
j. Search results shall be restricted based on permissions within user profiles. If the user 
has insufficient permissions to see a search result, the system shall provide sufficient feedback 
(e.g. “access restricted to Jan 1, 2006 problem on X subsystem”) so the user can request 
permission to view the data. 
k. The system shall allow users to store search queries (e.g. data on X subsystem, of Y 
severity, between dates A and B, etc.) so that a query may be built once, stored, and reused.
5.7.2 Browsing and Navigation
The Contractor shall ensure the following browsing and navigation criteria [choose as required]:
a. The system shall allow users to browse the Data Archive/Repository.
b. The browsing interface shall support sorting and filtering based on metadata content 
and the time/date of uploads or downloads.
c. The system shall allow users to select particular files or metadata for detailed viewing 
within the system.
d. The system shall allow users to view the content of files, packages, or metadata in a 
Web browser.
[State other requirements.] 
5.7.3 Viewing and Archiving Data
The Contractor shall ensure the following viewing and archiving criteria [choose as required]:
a. The system shall allow users to construct new data packages (integrated data views) 
by assembling files that reside in the Acceptance Data Package (ADP) Data Archive/Repository.
b. The system shall allow users to create a “snapshot” of a data package that can be 
retrieved later and will act as a historical record of how the data in that package appeared at the 
time the snapshot was created.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
111 of 217
c. Archived data packages shall include additional metadata that specify the time/date of 
archival and the identity of the user who created the archived package.
d. The system shall allow for the control of access to data files and packages dependent 
on user profile information (see section [State Section].
e. The system shall allow provider personnel to upload data files and packages to the 
system without making those files and packages visible or accessible to any user outside the 
provider’s organization.
f. The system shall provide configurable workflow support for provider approval 
processes that employ electronic notifications and digital signatures.
g. The system shall allow provider personnel to change the visibility and accessibility of 
their own uploaded data files and packages such that, once approved by the provider, users 
outside the provider organization (i.e. NASA personnel) may view and access those files and 
packages.
h. The system shall prevent provider personnel from restricting access to data files and 
packages once they have been approved by the provider and released to NASA unless NASA 
personnel give explicit approval (e.g. one or more digital signatures) concurring with such 
restrictions.
i. Once a user has created a data package, the system shall support sharing that package 
with other users who have the required access based on their user profile information.
[State other requirements.] 
5.8 Stored Data
The Contractor shall ensure the following stored data requirements [choose as required]:
a. The system shall allow users to specify, construct, and store Technical Data Packages 
(TDPs).
b. The system shall explicitly tag, label, or otherwise represent with metadata or data 
that a package is a TDP, not an ADP.
c. The system shall treat TDPs as static, historical documents.
d. Each TDP shall include metadata requirements as described in this document.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
112 of 217
e. Each TDP shall include metadata specifying the time and date of creation, the user 
who created the package, and the criteria used to construct the package.
[State other requirements.] 
5.9 Technical Data Package Definitions
The Contractor shall allow users to store the criteria used to construct a TDP without saving the 
particular content of the TDP. That is, the system shall allow users to specify a “view” of data 
that is dynamically updated each time it is invoked.
5.9.1 Unpackaged Data
The system shall allow users to store data files that are associated with no particular data 
package.
Each data file shall conform to the data format requirements described below: [State 
Requirements.]
Each data file shall include metadata described below: [State Requirements.]
5.10 Workflow and Notifications
5.10.1 Notifications
The Contractor shall ensure a notification system exists to provide users with updates either 
based on their affiliation/role (e.g. contact for responsible organization) or user data (e.g. Jane 
Smith) as described in the section on user profiles [choose as required]:
a. The system shall allow notifications to be sent based on a variety of triggering events. 
For example, requests for action (e.g. review of an ADP or file is requested, etc.), status changes 
(e.g. a new ADP or ADP component is delivered), and other events might trigger systemgenerated notifications or emails to users.
b. Notification shall be available in both an automated (e.g. system sends notification 
when action item is created) and user-initiated manner (e.g. a user requests a signature and an 
email is sent to inform another user of the request).
c. The system shall provide the capability to notify users via email.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
113 of 217
d. Defaults shall be provided for both time-based (e.g. X hours before an action is due) 
and activity-based (e.g. when a user has marked an action complete) notification triggers that are 
modifiable by the system administrator.
e. Users shall have the capability to modify their configuration of time-based and 
activity-based notification triggers within their personal settings attached to their user profile.
5.10.2 Digital Signatures
The Contractor shall ensure the following digital signature criteria [choose as required]:
a. The system shall include digital signature authority, and that authority will be based 
on roles specified in the user profile (e.g. only certain classes of users can submit an ADP for 
NASA review/approval). 
b. The system shall provide the capability for users to request digital signatures of 
specific individuals or roles within the system. 
5.10.3 Change Log
The Contractor shall ensure the following change log criteria [choose as required]:
a. The system shall log information about changes or updates to the data in the system 
(uploads or downloads of data or metadata, archival of data packages or package definitions, 
drops of data to the dropbox) by user and time stamp at the level of the individual field for 
metadata and at the level of data files otherwise.
b. Change log information shall include all workflow data (requests for signatures, 
signatures, etc.). 
c. The system shall support authorized Internet access initiated from any off-site data 
provider, any NASA Center, and/or inquiries from any authorized source location (e.g. an 
authorized user’s home workstation).
5.11 Administration and Other System Functions
The Contractor shall ensure administration and other system functions [choose from sections 
5.11.1 through 5.11.3 as required].
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
114 of 217
5.11.1 Administration
The system shall provide an interface that allows metadata schema modification by a system 
administrator and is abstracted above the code level.
The interface for metadata schema modification shall be textual and appropriate for use by a 
system administrator using a text or XML-type editor.
The system shall provide an interface that allows a system administrator to specify and modify 
workflow requirements (e.g. required signatures).
The system shall provide an interface that allows a system administrator to create, modify, and 
delete user accounts, including user profile information as described in section [State Section].
The system shall provide an interface that allows an administrator to create, modify, and delete 
sets of field-relevant information over time (e.g. update the values available in drop-down menus 
for metadata collection).
The system shall provide an interface that allows an administrator to create, modify, and delete 
user groups.
The system shall allow an administrator to create, modify, and delete permissions, 
customizations, and access to the system and system data and metadata for user groups.
The system shall allow an administrator to create logical relations among groups (e.g. to relate 
groups hierarchically, to declare that user groups are mutually exclusive.
5.11.2 User Profile Data 
User profile data shall contain the user’s full name, username, affiliation data, role data, and 
customization data as described below:
a. Usernames shall be unique identifiers that may link users to system actions or to 
workflow elements such as action items assigned or signatures pending.
b. Affiliation data shall include employer and organization code (where applicable).
c. Role data shall include the user’s title or position and the user’s level of signatory
authority as described in the digital approval authority requirements in section 5.10.2 to facilitate 
workflow management.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
115 of 217
d. Customization data shall include modifications the user has made to system 
settings/defaults, which may include functions that vary widely from stored search queries to 
user interface settings.
e. Permissions rules shall apply to information access based on user profile data to 
determine:
(1) The accessible data set (e.g. X project only or Contractor A sees NASA data only 
but not Contractor B’s data), and
(2) The type/level of access (e.g. read only versus write).
f. Users shall be able to control customization data directly within the system through 
their settings.
g. User profile data shall include information about the user groups [state section] to 
which the user belongs.
5.11.3 Authentication and Security
A single login and password shall be used for access to all components of the ADP system. In 
cases where the system links to data in external systems (e.g. as described in section 5.12 on 
integration with external systems), a second authentication/login will not be required where 
possible.
The system shall not allow users to perform any actions anonymously or in another user's name. 
This shall apply to all levels of access, including system administrators with the most broadly 
defined permissions.
Authentication shall engage the customized features outlined in section [State Section] on user 
profile data.
All authentication information shall be passed using a minimum of 256-bit encryption.
All data being sent over networks not controlled by NASA shall be encrypted to protect against 
data theft during transmission.
The system shall be capable of blocking access to data and metadata based on user profile 
information. 
The system shall allow data and metadata to be defined as modifiable only by certain groups or 
individuals. These restrictions shall be managed through use of user profile data in section [State 
Section].
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
116 of 217
5.12 Integration with Other Information Systems
The Contractor shall ensure integration with other information systems [choose from sections 
5.12.1 through 5.12.3 as required].
5.12.1 Data Decomposition
The system shall provide the capability to decompose an ADP or TDP into its component data 
files and to operate on those files independently of one another in service of building new 
packages, transferring data to [Identify Name] systems, or delivering data back to an ADP 
provider.
5.12.2 Transfer of Data to [Identify Name] Systems
The system shall provide the capability to transfer/route any TDP or unpackaged data file to the 
appropriate [Identify Name] data source(s) or system(s).
The system shall decompose TDPs into their constituent unpackaged data files prior to routing.
The system shall allow an administrator to specify rules or information required for routing to
[Identify Name] data sources. For example, an administrator would be able to write a rule that 
says, “If metadata field F has value V, then route the associated data to system S.”
The system shall allow an administrator to add, update, and delete information required for 
routing to [Identify Name] data sources.
The system shall allow an administrator to add, update, and delete any special data format 
requirements needed to enable routing to [Identify Name] data sources.
The system shall allow an administrator to update, alter, add, and remove any special data format 
requirements needed to enable routing to [Identify Name] data sources.
When no electronic link with a [Identify Name] data source is available/possible, the system 
shall provide the capability to send email or other notification to a point of contact for the 
unavailable data source so that a person may assist with the transfer/routing of data into that data 
source.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
117 of 217
5.12.3 Retrieval of Current Data from [Identify Name] Systems
The system shall allow users to retrieve current data from [Identify Name] Information Systems.
The system shall distinguish Contractor-submitted data from NASA-generated data.
The system shall store data retrieved from [Identify Name] Information Systems in the Data 
Archive/Repository as unpackaged data as stated in section [State Section] only when one or 
more of the following conditions are met:
a. Those data are part of a TDP, and not otherwise.
b. Those data belong in a [Identify Name] Information System that is unavailable (i.e. 
not integrated with the ADP system).
Whenever the system displays data to the user that were retrieved from a [Identify Name] 
Information System, the system shall provide a clear visual indication of the time and date that 
the displayed data were retrieved.
Whenever the system displays data to the user that were retrieved from a [Identify Name]
Information System that uses a version control scheme other than the time and date stamping, the 
system shall provide a clear visual indication of the version or revision of the displayed data.
5.13 Non-Functional Requirements
The Contractor shall ensure the following non-functional requirements exist when the data is 
stored in Contractor systems [choose from sections 5.13.1 through 5.13.8 as required].
5.13.1 Availability
The system shall be available at least 99 percent of the time on a 24-hour, 7-day-per-week basis. 
This includes planned outages associated with maintenance or software updates. This does not 
protect against an individual Center or an individual user losing access because of power loss, 
network failure, or other outages.
Planned outages shall be scheduled with agreement from the system administrator to ensure that 
they do not coincide with peak usage times (e.g. when hardware is being delivered and accepted 
ahead of integration testing).
All functionality shall be available to authorized users on any authorized computer that has the 
necessary software (an acceptable Web browser).
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
118 of 217
The server environment shall provide one of the following:
a. Backup server(s) that are physically and electronically separate from the primary 
server(s) to take the load if there are problems with the primary server(s).
b. Spare server that can replace part or all of the primary server to take over the full load of 
the system.
5.13.2 Flexibility
Software shall employ standardized abstraction layers in connections to any database, data 
repository, data warehouse, or other storage structure.
The system shall not rely on commands or code specific to any single database, data repository, 
data warehouse, or other storage structure.
5.13.3 Software Integration
The following elements have to be replaceable and updatable with no update to the software 
code of the rest of the elements:
a. Database technology.
b. Applications software.
c. Data integration layers.
Any changes to the communication specifications used to connect software elements must be 
approved by all applications that use them, and agreements shall be reached to ensure any needed 
changes to individual systems are made in time.
5.13.4 Platforms
The system shall be compatible with the operating systems specified as Agency standards in 
NASA-STD-2804, Minimum Interoperability Software Suite (i.e. no functionality will be 
restricted or unavailable to users of any of the standard operating systems).
5.13.5 Security
The required security level for the system shall be determined using the criteria defined in NIST 
SP 800-60, Guide for Mapping Types of Information and Information Systems to Security 
Categories.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
119 of 217
The system shall comply with the requirements set forth in NPD 2810.1 and NPR 2810.1,
Security of Information Technology. 
The system shall be tested against security controls for the defined security level as mandated by 
NIST SP 800-53, VI & VII, Recommended Security Controls for Federal Information Systems.
5.13.6 Network
Rules for allowable connections to the system shall be maintained by system administrators to 
ensure that the proper balance between security and access to data is maintained.
The system shall be able to block specified services if the user’s network connection is deemed 
insecure.
All servers shall be protected by a firewall allowing access only to the ports used by the ADP 
system and its approved sibling applications.
The firewall shall also use allowed Internet protocol (IP) lists for ports that are specifically 
opened to connecting servers together.
The system shall be capable of encrypting data up to 256 bits.
5.13.7 Integrity
All data and related software shall be automatically backed up daily with a minimum of 1 month 
of roll-back capability.
All backups shall be stored on two distinct types of media (e.g. hard drive and tape).
5.13.8 Scalability
The system shall accommodate up to [Insert Number] concurrent users (estimate based on 
percentage of total [Insert Number] users).
The system shall support on the order of [Insert Number] user accounts (estimate based on 
number of users per Contractor by number of primes plus percentage of NASA personnel).
The system shall store and process on the order of [State Number] terabytes of data and metadata 
combined (estimate based on average file size by number of files).
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
120 of 217
6. Conclusion
A NASA-wide policy or standardized approach for ensuring data integrity, access, and 
successful transfer does not currently exist as practices. It varies across the Agency. The team 
did find instances where policies are currently in place or in work and fully acknowledges the 
flexibility of each individual program, project, or contract to tailor. In the absence of a NASAwide policy, contracts should ensure contract language exists to identify and review data 
acquisition requirements and, in particular, the rights the Government should have in using the 
delivered data for the full program. This must be done as early as possible in project planning to 
establish an integrated set of data requirements. The requirement to deliver and manage data in a 
digital environment influences the manner in which data delivery requirements are levied on 
existing and future contracts. Ongoing contracts should consider contract modifications to 
require the delivery and management of contractually delivered data in a digital environment on 
contracts that do not currently require data delivery in a digital format.
NASA should acquire only the essential Contractor-originated data required to meet all program 
life-cycle requirements. Every attempt should be made to integrate all functional specialties, e.g.
safety, reliability, quality, logistics, test, verification, etc., to minimize data acquisition 
redundancies and inconsistencies. This integrated effort must include sub-projects within the 
various programs.
For ongoing NASA Earth science contracts, continue to use the following guidance:
a. NASA will plan and follow data acquisition policies that ensure the collection of 
long-term data sets needed to satisfy the research requirements of NASA's Earth science 
program. 
b. NASA commits to the full and open sharing of Earth science data obtained from 
NASA Earth-observing satellites, sub-orbital platforms, and field campaigns with all users as 
soon as such data become available. 
c. There will be no period of exclusive access to NASA Earth science data. Following a 
post-launch checkout period, all data will be made available to the user community. Any 
variation in access will result solely from user capability, equipment, and connectivity. 
d. NASA will make available all NASA-generated standard products along with the 
source code for algorithm software, coefficients, and ancillary data used to generate these 
products. 
e. All NASA Earth science missions, projects, grants, and cooperative agreements shall 
include data management plans to facilitate the implementation of these data principles. 
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
121 of 217
f. NASA will enforce a principle of non-discriminatory data access so that all users will 
be treated equally. For data products supplied from an international partner or another agency, 
NASA will restrict access only to the extent required by the appropriate Memorandum of 
Understanding (MOU).
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
122 of 217
APPENDIX C
MODEL-BASED DATA DEFINITION
C.1 PURPOSE
NASA engineering and partners use models defined through model-based data definition as part 
of model-based enterprise (MBE). This NASA Technical Handbook provides a means for 
consistent model-based data definition, direction, and execution supporting model-based 
acquisition methods, practices, and protocols as defined and utilized per program and Center 
definition. 
MBE is an integral part of the technical baseline that includes the requirements, analysis, design, 
implementation, and verification of a capability, system, and/or product throughout the life cycle.
Model-based engineering and definition have multiple meanings to many people, and the intent 
of this Appendix is to identify and define the elements of MBE that are impacted and driven by 
the program DRD.
To provide a common baseline of definition and guidelines, the following sections discuss not 
only the premise of the description but also a definition as provided by the National Institute of 
Standards and Technology, NASA, and commercial companies doing business with NASA.
C.2 MODEL-BASED DATA DEFINITION
Model-based data definition is a subset and critical element of MBE and is intended to increase 
the probability of mission success by increasing the availability, effectiveness, integrity, fidelity,
and efficiency of model data and data interchange/integration across like as well as disparate 
systems. The end goal of data definition is to provide and improve the availability of the right 
data to the right people at the right time, thereby reducing risk. 
The process for the management of technical data (models) is required by NPR 7123.1 for 
ensuring that the digital data required are captured, stored, version controlled and managed, data 
integrity is maintained, and data dissemination processes and data definition and integrity meet 
contracted requirements.
Within the MBE framework, model-based data definition defines not only the context of the data 
definition but also the management of product data as it is defined for use (Process). It enables
informed decision making across the product development cycle and applies a consistent set of 
business solutions that support MBE elements such as MBSE, model-based manufacturing 
(MBM), model-based inspection (MBI) (utilizing CAD for CMM inspections).
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
123 of 217
Model-based data definition:
a. Enables process optimization and maturity using MBE as a baseline and establishes a 
paradigm to help NASA programs achieve the highest level of collaboration, interoperability, 
efficiency, and data availability. The implementation of a fully digital MBE environment is 
necessary to comply with the program requirements.
b. Defines and enables technological requirements, whereas IT systems across NASA 
need to be made interoperable or integrated to the extent needed to provide a secure, readily 
accessible environment to enable required collaborative MBE capabilities.
c. Is the underlying architecture required to tie data and processes together and provides 
the framework for collaboration and interoperability. MBSE is the systems engineering subset of 
MBE.
d. Provides the foundation and capability to orchestrate procedural events such as design 
reviews from authoritative data sources.
Table 4, Example Products in the MBE Environment, provides products expected in Pre-Phase A 
through Phase F.
Table 4—Example Products/Activities in an MBE Environment
Pre-Phase 
A
Phase A Phase B Phase C Phase D Phase E Phase F
Concept 
Studies
Concept & 
Technical 
Development
Preliminary 
Design
Final Design 
& 
Fabrication
Assembly, 
Test, & 
Launch
Operations 
& 
Sustainment
Closeout
Conceptual 
systems, 
behavioral 
and 
descriptive 
models and 
simulations, 
especially 
MBSE
Cost 
estimation
Functional 
and nonfunctional 
requirements
Functional 
flows
MBSE and 
MBD models, 
including 
analysis and 
simulations
CAD designs
MB(x) 
models, 
including 
failure 
modes 
analysis
Prototype 
test data
Refined costs
MBSE/MBE 
models and 
simulations
MBSE/MBE 
models and 
simulations
MBD –
GD&T, PMI
Inspection 
data
Change 
orders
Effectivities
Integration
Models & 
simulations
Verification
Certification
Change 
orders
Effectivities
Operations
Anomalies
Simulations
Science data
Change 
orders
Effectivities
Commissioning 
simulations
Data archiving
Final costs
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
124 of 217
Architecture, infrastructure, and data definition are at the core of this framework on which all 
collaboration (Center to Center and Center to prime/partner), workflows, data management, and 
data sharing will be built. 
Additionally, MBE elements to be considered and included in the data definition or the DRD are 
NOT restricted to only CAD models and may also include many of the MB(x) definitions listed 
in Appendix D.
It is imperative that all parties as defined in the DRD take notice to the consistency of definition 
and follow NASA policies and standards to ensure compliance. 
Notable elements for focus during data definition are discussed in sections C.3 through C.15 in 
this Appendix. See Appendix G for use cases for establishing MBE elements and 
interoperability requirements.
C.3 “SYSTEM MODELS” VIA MODEL-BASED SYSTEMS
ENGINEERING (MBSE)
MBSE is a method to drive system models that represent functions, requirements, and conceptual 
systems and is present and interactive within the life cycle (concept definition through 
retirement). The intent of MBSE is to facilitate traditional systems engineering resulting in 
enhanced communications, specification and design, system design integration, and reuse of 
system artifacts and models. MBSE can support both engineering data and business data.
In MBSE definition and engineering, a system model is at the center of the developmental 
process, from requirements development, through design, implementation, and testing. The 
model is a specification that is continually refined throughout the development process. After 
model development, simulation shows whether the model works correctly. 
It is expected that in the MBE environment, MBSE will extend to domains to support complex 
predictive and effects-based modeling that include integration of engineering models with 
scientific and phenomenology models; social, economic, and political models; and human 
behavioral models10
. 
While the output of MBSE is an analytical system model, it is sometimes developed in 
SysML™. In an MBE environment, MBSE is a key critical success factor in that it helps teams 
 
10 MBSE State of Practice - 2020. Presented at the INCOSE 2007 Symposium. 
http://www.incose.org/enchantment/docs/07docs/07jul_4mbseroadmap.pdf (accessible to INCOSE members only)
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
125 of 217
focus thinking to develop engineering work products. MBSE captures the decisions, performs 
analyses, and produces review and audit materials. 
An MBSE system model can incorporate other abstract models to document design sets and 
graphical presentations of process flows that enable group participation in concurrent 
engineering. This includes CAD models, digital manufacturing models, as-built models, modelbased testing, and logistics functions. MBSE provides the capability for these reviews to be 
conducted with a single-source interconnection model that provides viewing of the system 
models and their interactions from different perspectives (i.e. discipline-dependent views).
All uses of the MBSE artifacts must be clearly defined per program and defined in the program 
DRD. 
C.4 Requirements
The size (scope and scale) of a program/project has an impact on the MBE environment and 
solution but is not deterministic in regard to requirements for managing product data. Factors 
such as the nature of the mission; mission class; the amount and types of data; data acquisition; 
sensitivity; retention needs; the location, timing, and duration of data access; and the 
organizational relationships of participants are important for characterizing the demands that 
programs/projects make on expected MBE capabilities. 
Requirements management in a model-based program/project environment provides a 
framework for defining, refining, documenting, and maintaining the requirements of the 
product(s) produced by the program/project. The requirements are to be maintained and managed 
throughout the entire life cycle of the project. 
Program/project requirements are defined and documented by the program/project’s systems 
engineering and integration functions, or their designees, and documented in the Systems 
Engineering Management Plan in accordance with NPR 7123.1.
Requirements should be defined in the DRD and:
 Allocate requirements to various program/project organizations for decomposition.
 Define the relationship of requirements to other information in the MBE environment.
 Provide the framework for requirement derivation and a scheme for parent and child 
requirement relationships.
 Provide links for access to authoritative requirement information.
 Allow the definition and management of detailed information attached to the 
requirement such as margins, technology readiness levels, risks, and cost data.
 Be traceable to its source, downstream to its implementing product component, and to 
their verification and validation activity.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
126 of 217
 Be securely controlled and traceable from beginning to end of life (history and use).
 Be captured in a virtual database that provides secure but easy access. Requirements 
management tools should provide automatic notification of requirement changes and 
impact to flow-down or linked requirements.
C.5 COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN (CAD) DATA (MECHANICAL CAD 
[MCAD]/ELECTRICAL CAD [ECAD]/COMPUTER-AIDED 
ENGINEERING [CAE]/COMPUTER-AIDED MANUFACTURING 
[CAM])
Effective CAD data management enables immediate access to needed PDD but must define 
relationships between all associated CAD parts and assemblies. CAD management of MCAD, 
ECAD, and CAM parts and assemblies have to include management of systems and software 
across the entire program/project life cycle. 
Items to be considered and resolved within the definition of the DRD should address and take 
into consideration problems seen and occurring with managing CAD data because:
a. Incomplete information causes iterations—not all CAD objects come with CAD data 
packages.
b. CAD naming conflicts—may have multiple names for the same parts.
c. Change management—lack of governance needed and defined with approval, as 
names may change—no way to see if it is the same geometry.
d. Data conversion—CAD drawings are converted to a defined standard for consistency 
(see Appendix F).
e. Broken CAD links when moved manually—links and relationships are broken losing 
traceability.
f. Inconsistent CAD and model version/revision controlled. 
g. Inconsistent modeling standards.
h. No design intent captured or shared. 
Programs/projects should work to define, agree with, and implement a CAD data management 
environment in which: 
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
127 of 217
a. MCAD (parts and assembly) models and associated data are captured in a virtual and 
accessible database.
b. Relationships between all associated MCAD parts and assemblies are defined.
c. Ability to rename to-be-determined (TBD) items prior to release into MBE exists, or 
if late, fall under a change control board for traceability.
d. Structured check-in/checkout process and revision control ensure data integrity.
e. Workflow and automatic notification capabilities enable adoption of product 
development best practices.
f. ECAD and systems (parts, files, and assembly) data are available through a virtual 
database.
C.6 Part Manufacturing Information (PMI)
The mechanical properties and design for manufacturing instructions of a product (for example,
digital mock-up (DMU), digital computer-aided test model) and PMI have to be properly
examined and checked for content, context, and maturity. This can involve checking the overall 
geometry with regard to dimensions and shape, interference checks, and collision checks for 
assembly and disassembly, as well as design space checks.
For these purposes, the geometry, product structure, and metadata are displayed and analyzed in 
a DMU application; however, results are captured in the model data definition. A distinction is 
made between static and dynamic DMU analysis. In the case of static DMU, an examination of 
the static parts is performed. In the case of dynamic DMU, the dynamic parts or assemblies are 
examined.
While visualization is critical to convey design intent and analyze form and fit, information used 
to drive manufacturing (PMI) and assembly is also critical. DMU is an excellent source of 
information and graphics to enable and provide quality instruction downstream. Tracking and 
capture of this information is equally important and has to be defined as a critical path item in the 
DRD.
As a rule, a simplified, tessellated representation of the envelope geometry is usually sufficient 
for use in DMU. In the case of measurements, however, it should be noted that the level of 
tessellation accuracy always must be higher than the required measuring accuracy.
The most important items to consider are:
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
128 of 217
 The availability of applications that support the respective required DMU 
functionality (e.g. assembly checks and collision control).
 Use of models from different source systems (multi-CAD).
 High-quality examination of large assemblies.
 Transferability of kinematics from the original model to the target model for dynamic 
DMU analysis.
 Development of a TDP from which other Centers, partners/primes, and suppliers can 
derive design intent to properly manufacture the product.
C.7 Modeling and Simulation (M&S)
Results from M&S are rich data used daily for making critical decisions in design, development, 
manufacturing, ground operations, and flight operations. The program/project manager and 
delegated Technical Authority(s) have the responsibility for ensuring the credibility of the results 
from these M&S activities (reference NASA-STD-7009, Standard for Models and Simulations 
and NASA-HDBK-7009, NASA Handbook for Models and Simulations: An Implementation 
Guide for NASA-STD-7009). Models and resulting simulations fall under the governance of the 
DRD to ensure all parties are working with the latest, common data.
Confidence in M&S results is achieved by:
a. Identification of best practices to ensure that knowledge of operations is captured in 
the user interfaces (e.g. users are not able to enter parameters that are out of bounds).
b. Development of processes for tool verification and validation, certification, reverification, revalidation, and recertification based on operational data and trending.
c. Development/identification of standards for documentation, CDM, and quality 
assurance.
d. Identification of any training or certification requirements to ensure proper 
operational capabilities.
e. Development/identification of a plan for tool management, maintenance, and 
obsolescence consistent with modeling/simulation environments and the aging or changing of the 
modeled platform or system.
f. Development of a process for user feedback when results appear unrealistic or defy 
explanation.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
129 of 217
g. Development of a standard method to assess the credibility of M&S presented to the 
decision maker when making critical decisions (i.e. decisions that affect human safety or mission 
success) using results from M&S.
h. Assurance that the credibility of M&S meets the project requirements, and the 
appropriate documentation is captured and preserved.
i. Reinforced verification and validation (V&V) models and practice.
C.8 Document Management
Documents such as specifications, policies, and test results (other than CAD and systems 
models) provide an important communication medium using prose. This facilitates a broad 
communication of program information to a broad set of engineering and business backgrounds. 
MBE is evolving to be the source of the document production, where documents are 
communication methods and the models are the authoritative source. 
C.9 Documentation and Archiving
For the purpose of documenting and archiving engineering data, it is normally necessary to 
factor in exact data representation, including all metadata and PMI. The DRD must be prolific 
throughout the life cycles but also needs to define consistency and accessibility even after design 
is complete.
The latter is especially important with regard to product approval and product documentation if 
drawings and technical documents are being replaced by digital 3D models. Compliance 
requirements often need to be satisfied.
The most important requirement relating to the documentation and archiving of engineering data 
is that all relevant information be stored in a format that can be read irrespective of a specific IT 
infrastructure and after a long period of time; in the aerospace industry, for example, the Long 
Term Archiving and Retrieval (LOTAR) activity (http://www.lotar-international.org/lotarstandard.html) addresses archiving of data for long life-cycle programs.
The most important items to consider are:
a. Ensuring proper consideration is given to all product data.
b. Ensuring problem-free combination of data from different source systems.
c. Ensuring that the data can be accessed even after long periods of time (standardized 
format).
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
130 of 217
C.10 Portable Product Life-Cycle Management (PLM) Document
In modern product development processes, the utilization of 3D information does not end in the 
engineering department. Integrated product development (sometimes referred to as concurrent 
engineering) requires that departments/functions such as purchasing, quality assurance, technical 
documentation, configuration management, planning, manufacturing, operations, maintenance, 
and sustaining also have to be able to access 3D information in combination with a wide variety 
of different documents such as bids and requests for quotes, quality control checklists, technical 
and manufacturing documentation, etc. 
It is important that the program DRD owns this responsibility and ensures that this content can 
be combined in a multimedia container that includes all the information and can also be used 
offline.
The most important items to consider are:
a. Information in the form of 3D data, metadata such as 2D representation, text data, and 
binary data can be combined in a single file and can be managed there.
b. The data can be combined easily with information from various source systems. 
c. Comprehensive control options for file access (intellectual property protection) exist.
d. Easy-to-use, cross-system viewers are available.
C.11 Configuration and Data Management (CDM)
CM in the model-based environment provides the structured environment with a framework for 
programs/projects to develop and control their requirements and associated engineering products 
and information, providing a system to reconcile and enforce accountability between various 
bills of material (BOMs) covering several configurations and restructuring use cases such as 
BOM splits, merge, substitutes, change action propagation, etc.
The CDM structured environment must address and define the following:
a. Functional and performance characteristics of the program/project’s products.
b. Functional, allocated, and product baselines.
c. Requirements for the design, manufacturing, testing, checkout, training, maintenance, 
operations, sustaining, and disposal of the products.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
131 of 217
d. Verification that the end product is in compliance with the requirements and 
associated information.
e. Traceability of waiver, deviation, and non-compliance of requirements information.
f. Retention, security, and data integrity of records.
g. The determined level of CM by supporting organizations.
The program/project-level CDM processes need to flow down to establish and maintain 
consistency of multi-level supplier organizations’ products with requirements through the entire 
program/project life cycle via the MBE environment. 
CM creates a consistent and systematic method for products delivered to the programs/projects 
that:
a. Identify the product configuration (architecture, current status, and related 
information) at KDPs and other times.
b. Systematically control changes to the product configuration.
c. Maintain the integrity and traceability of the product configuration throughout the 
product life cycle (for example, operations anomaly functions may require fast access to 
information from the earliest product phases).
d. Preserve and retire product records throughout the product life cycle to be defined in 
NPR 1441.1, NASA Records Management Program Requirements. 
The CM administrative function defined in SAE EIA-649-2 shows how the product data is to be 
released. Once data has been released, it follows the structured procedures and processes 
established by the program/project’s CDM and MBE Plans.
The program/project manager and delegated Technical Authority(s) define and document as part 
of the MBE Plan what product data are released, when that product data are to be released, 
events that necessitate product data change, and the processes that provide the visibility of the 
product data configuration life cycle for internally and externally produced product data.
C.12 Bills of Material (BOM) Product Breakdown Structure
A product breakdown structure is a hierarchical program/project view of the relationships of the 
hardware and software products and component products. Product structure provides a platform 
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
132 of 217
on which an entire program/project product family can be based. Product structure involves 
decomposition of the overall functionality of a product into a set of defined functions, the 
component parts of the product that provide those functions, and the specification of the interface 
between the components—how components interact together in the product as a system. It is a 
product data structure that captures the end products, its assemblies, their quantities, and 
relationships.
A BOM is a functionally dependent view of a subset of the product structure that includes the 
physical items and is a formally structured list for an object (semi-finished or finished product) 
that lists all the component parts of the object with the name, reference number, quantity, and 
unit of measure of each component. MBE should provide for traceable documentation of all 
changes to the BOM, including when and why it was changed, which documentation 
implemented the change, who approved the changes, and the disposition of the affected items.
Problems occur with the development and use of BOMs because:
a. Only the “as-designed” BOM is managed in engineering.
b. The proposal BOM is created, then not carried forward.
c. Not all data delivered are related to part definition.
d. No product structure is delivered. 
e. Effectivity for BOM change is limited to a single change and by date only; most 
recent is all that is saved.
f. Substitutes and alternatives are managed as separate BOMs and products.
Programs/projects should work to define and implement a product structure and BOM 
development that can:
a. Manage product structure and BOM data.
b. Capture and manage substitutes and alternative parts.
c. Provide revision control and history of product (BOM) data.
d. Manage multiple views of the BOM, including as proposed, as designed, as built, and 
as launched.
e. Manage effectivity by event, date, lot, or serial number as necessary.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
133 of 217
The product structure should be documented in the MBE Plan and provides a simple, concise 
view of the product that can be used as the central point of reference for all information 
describing and related to each element, subsystem, assembly, subassembly, and part comprised 
within the structure. The complete product breakdown structure segment list should be defined, 
including design data for an assembly and/or subassembly such as as-designed (Engineering or 
EBOM), as-built or as-manufactured (Manufacturing or MBOM), as manifested, as flown, and as 
disposed, beginning either at the highest level (system) or lowest level (component) to access all 
related data based on access privileges.
A good product structure should:
a. Be a decomposition/interrogation of the system into its parts.
b. Define the complete segment list, including design data for an assembly and/or 
subassembly such as:
(1) As designed—a product structure representing the configuration after release, 
before manufacturing is started.
(2) As built (as manufactured)—a product structure that represents the configuration 
as it has been manufactured and delivered to the NASA inventory.
(3) As manifested—a product structure representing a configuration designated for a 
specific flight.
(4) As flown—a product structure representing a configuration that has flown.
(5) As disposed—a product structure representing a configuration that has been 
decommissioned.
Provide the capability for an individual to start at the highest level (system) to access all related 
data (based on the individual’s access privileges) by drilling down to the lowest component of 
the system, as well as walking up from the lowest component to the highest level, including, but 
not limited to, access to supporting design documents such as analysis reports, test reports, 
requirements, and V&V checklists. 
Components include hardware, software, and configurable logic devices as shown in the 
examples below:
a. System.
b. Segment.
c. Element.
d. Subsystem.
e. Assembly.
f. Subassembly (component).
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
134 of 217
g. Part (piece part).
C.13 Engineering Release and Change Management
All engineering releases, changes, and supporting information are properly managed and the 
terminology of the engineering release process properly defined. The change process is to be a 
multi-level supplier, closed-loop process with changes automatically integrated, routed, and 
closed looped with the impacts of the change easily visible. A history of changes is to be 
maintained. 
Program/project managers, delegated Technical Authorities, and appropriate engineering 
organizations consider engineering release of data that occurs during the following life-cycle 
states/phases as part of the development of MBE engineering release and change management: 
a. Requirements definition.
b. Design and development.
c. Fabrication/manufacturing.
d. Test and verification.
e. Flight and operational data.
The term release (as a verb) is to authorize for dissemination a particular version of a product 
and/or product information that is made available for a specific purpose. The activities associated 
with the term “release” can change during these different life-cycle states/phases. For example, 
release of the design configuration makes available the set of design information, incrementally 
released to date, by the development activity for a product during a product’s definition 
(development) phase.
The term “release” can be used in a given context to mean “you can do X with Y,” where both X 
and Y vary. For example:
a. Released Upper Stage CAD model of Liquid Oxygen (LOX) tank (Yproduction) 
means the prime can start manufacturing (Xmake or buy).
b. Released trade study of material choices for Upper Stage LOX tank (Y’) means 
designers can proceed with Upper Stage tank design work (X’).
A data object is defined by the object itself, its metadata (including effectivity), and its state (e.g.
“in work,” “under review,” “released”). Additional data are required to indicate how the data 
objects relate to other data (e.g. effectivity). A method for capturing the object and relational data 
is to be developed for usage, change control, and integration of its intended use (effectivity and 
authorized usage).
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
135 of 217
The object’s type alone does not necessarily determine its usage without supporting metadata. 
For example, a CAD model can be released as:
a. Design definition model for manufacturing (e.g. Upper Stage LOX Tank Production 
Model release), or
b. Intended for use in outer mold line development.
Process details depend on both object type and intended use and are not exclusively defined by 
project phase, e.g. more design work is done in the detail design phase; but design work is also 
done in operations to support block changes and sustaining engineering. Object type and usage 
are considered along with project and product phases during process development. 
The program/project has to have confidence that data in a given state means the same thing to 
everyone:
a. A process that produces a known object in a known state is to be provided. For 
example: Product definition package (3D CAD models, 2D drawings, and material 
specifications) “released for manufacturing” always means released for production activities 
such as manufacturing planning, computer-controlled manufacturing machine programming, 
procurement, inventory management, etc.
b. If work is distributed among Centers or multi-tiered suppliers, the program/project 
needs to assess what release means across context and ensure effective integration.
Different objects have different uses and users, and it is those use cases that should determine the 
meaning of the states (e.g. preliminary release-development use only):
a. MBE and CDM distinguish between types of objects and their intended/authorized 
usages. For example: Several external suppliers use two design paths: prototype and 
manufacturing; 3D CAD models that are released for prototyping are NOT released for 
manufacturing.
b. Within each use case and for each product data category (i.e. CAD, parts assembly, 
analysis, etc.), the program/project manager and delegated Technical Authority(s) define the lifecycle states (in work, approved, released, etc.).
The program/project manager, delegated Technical Authority(s), and engineering determine if 
some data needs special handling and what standards should be used or developed to address this 
data. Examples of these data objects/types are engineering models/design/analyses (e.g.
SysML™, 3D CAD/CAE, etc.). Another data type, for example, could be MATLAB designs 
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
136 of 217
used for modeling of guidance, navigation, and control (GN&C) algorithms and then has source 
code auto-generated for integration into flight software. 
System synchronization, the process of collecting a known set of configurations for a systemwide test at various points in the overall system life cycle, enables early integration testing, as 
well as early investigation of alternatives.
With large amounts of externally provided data, it is difficult for NASA programs/projects or the 
lead systems integrator, due to cost and other factors, to insist that suppliers (e.g. primes, 
partners) all follow a defined/specific process. For this case, the program/project can and should 
insist that processes have key states that map to defined program/project core states:
a. The MBE Plan should provide a mapping of source states to destination states that 
provides confidence that the data can and will be used for the intended purposes and not 
unintentionally misused. The MBE Plan should lay out clear contractual requirements using the 
contract’s SOW/PWS and include DRDs utilizing standards such as MIL-STD-31000. (See 
Appendix A.) For example, an external supplier can call it “manufacturing release,” one NASA 
Center can call it “final release,” and another NASA Center can call it “engineering release,” 
which will be inconsequential when delivered per DRD.
b. Source-to-destination mapping confirms that all these are the same as the 
program/project-defined “production release.” Refer to Figure 2, Notional State Compatibility 
Map.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
137 of 217
Figure 2—Notional State Compatibility Map
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
138 of 217
C.14 Parts and Library Management
Parts data handling is distributed across Centers and out to primes, assigned to multiple different 
functional areas within projects, and maintained within locally controlled design environments.
Effective handling of how parts are identified, defined, categorized, authorized, and specifically, 
how CAD data objects are handled in systems for design and sustaining engineering, are critical 
to performing the job of systems integrator and must be defined in the DRD.
When part numbers exist without exact specifications, or exist with a part number that is similar 
to the part number of another component, time and resources will be required at a critical point in 
product development to reconcile the discrepancy. 
Part number proliferation causes confusion and duplication—not only duplication in effort but 
duplication in cost for maintaining parts inventory. Parts data handling processes should be 
defined upfront and should be enforced and followed for such matters as part naming and 
substitutes/alternatives. 
Establishing parts libraries is critical in program/project development. Multiple libraries can exist 
such as part definition libraries, M&S libraries, and CAD libraries. Maintenance of these 
libraries can be spread across multiple organizations, internal or external to the program/project, 
and usage can be shared by many users across organizational boundaries. It is imperative that the 
programs/projects understand and document the library structure and ensure approved practices 
are established. 
A CAD parts library functioning in an MBE environment provides an efficient and flexible 
framework for developing, promoting, using, and maintaining CAD common parts libraries, 
registries, catalogs, and associated support mechanisms. The description of these libraries, 
registries, catalogs, and databases may include terminology such as "standard," "preferred," and 
“electronic, electrical, and electromechanical (EEE).” The CAD functions supported by the 
libraries may include ECAD, MCAD, and CAM. 
A CAD parts library’s functions should include the following:
a. Accommodate the use of multiple CAD common parts libraries by the organizations
within the enterprise while requiring appropriate identification, naming, and usage; establish 
processes to minimize the number of duplicate labels for the same physical part.
b. Provide a mechanism for a CAD developer or integrator to determine if a part is 
already defined in a common library within the enterprise's MBE environment.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
139 of 217
c. Establish rules and business processes to accept individual new part definitions and 
designations into the program/project’s common parts catalog, registries, and naming 
conventions.
d. Establish rules and business processes to accept wholesale existing part definitions 
and designations (entire existing parts libraries) into the program/project’s common parts 
catalog, registries, and naming conventions.
e. Establish security rules and business processes for access to CAD parts that are 
proprietary, intellectual property, or designated as SBU.
f. Establish and support audit and compliance functions to verify that naming 
conventions, configuration and data management, and data architecture requirements have been 
satisfied.
g. Establish rules and business procedures for external organizations that are not part of 
the program/project’s MBE system to verify the uniqueness of proposed part names and enter 
new parts into the program/project’s parts catalog system (delivery from an external source).
The scope of the CAD common parts library interoperability processes should be flexible. The 
business processes for the CAD common parts library interoperability should be defined in the 
program/project's CAD standards, CDM, and MBE documentation.
The DRD should describe how CAD standards will be applied over the program/project’s life 
cycle, along with use of other internal or external standards, practices, settings, and supporting 
tools with responsible parties. The DRD should also identify the program/project data or 
documents that the CAD producer is to provide in addition to the CAD object to ensure full PDD 
such as parts lists, materials specifications, and acceptance testing specifications and where this 
material will be maintained.
C.15 Technology
MBE solutions should consider use of open architectures capable of supporting standardsdefined interoperability to address new and changing requirements. 
Critical items to be considered include:
a. Architecture: Common definition for data hierarchy and collaboration. Top down and 
bottom up links and relationships need to be considered and common across all program 
participants.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
140 of 217
b. Designing and implementing technical solutions for MBE require resources and 
knowledge.
c. Even the simplest consolidation of users onto an existing system requires technical 
support for the creation of accounts and the transfer of data, user training, and coordination with 
customers, their managers, and the technical support team.
d. Consolidations that involve greater technical effort would require the creation of new 
objects and the redefinition in the new location (or partition of an existing implementation), in 
addition to the simplest consolidation.
MBE technology is often (but not solely) procured as a single integrated tool suite provided by a 
single vendor comprised of commercial database management systems; custom-written software; 
COTS interface tools; report writers; integration and utilities elements; and configuration, 
auditing, administration, and definition files. 
While the value and economies of such a solution are evident, no one tool can accommodate all 
the needs in the heterogeneous environment present in many NASA programs/projects; and the 
evaluation and selection of the correct technology for MBE is critical. Therefore, a key critical 
success factor is the openness of the technology suite and standards-defined interoperability.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
141 of 217
APPENDIX D
DIGITAL DATA COLLABORATION
D.1 PURPOSE
This Appendix provides guidance for digital data collaboration. Data through all life-cycle 
phases can cross many entities that will likely change over time. That data today is generally 
electronic, the design environment continues to move toward a models-based approach, and the 
engineering/acquisition processes are more automated and demand a highly collaborative/social 
workforce during all phases of the life cycle.
D.2 DATA INTEGRITY AND SECURITY
Data integrity during data acquisition continues to become more important to ensure the 
following MBE artifacts, which can also be characterized as model-based x (MBx), are 
considered, where “x” can and should include:
a. MBSE (model-based systems engineering)—design capture of logical, functional, and 
behavioral system models leading to physical elements such as schematics, analyses, and CAD.
b. MBD (model-based definitions) - annotated 3D CAD models of design which capture 
the physical system models leading to design definition and manufacturing elements such as 
geometric dimensioning and tolerancing (GD&T), PMI, etc.
c. MBE (model-based enterprise) – an organization that uses model-based engineering
d. MBe (model-based engineering) - an approach to product development, design, 
manufacturing, and life-cycle support that uses digital models to drive all engineering activities.
e. MBD (model-based definition)—design capture of schematics, analyses, CAD, 
ECAD, CAM, 3D scan, surveys, field measurements, simulations, etc.
f. MBM (model-based manufacturing and assembly)—as designed/as built.
g. MBI (model-based inspection, including quality/compliance/assurance)—assurance 
that the digital mode realized products meet defined maturity and content levels as consumed and 
acted upon utilizing their product manufacturing information (PMI).
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
142 of 217
An established data definition framework captured and reported in the DRD ensures the 
following:
 Security: All PDD is captured through a secure environment that meets the data’s 
security requirements as defined by NPR 2810.1 regardless of the data’s form (digital 
or hardcopy). 
 Product Data Integrity: A single source of product definition where relationships
between all associated product documents are defined and managed.
 Automation: Workflow and automatic notification capabilities are provided. 
Note: This planned environment ensures that all product data (CAD and product documents) 
are captured and distributed per standard operating practice and are compliant with DRD 
definition.
 Relationships between models and all the associated CAD parts and product 
documents are defined and managed. 
 Data, particularly CAD part numbers, are searchable by attributes and metadata. 
 Product data are controlled as defined by contracts and data sensitivity and are 
securely shared as needed and when needed.
D.3 DRD Digital Data Standardization
The need was recognized for NASA to adopt industry standards and approaches for digital data 
interoperability to enable data interoperability and move beyond the storage of raw, uncorrelated 
data. The following sections contain the contract language and the associated standards 
necessary to execute digital data interoperability, which benefits NASA, its contractors, and 
partners. DRDs are provided in Appendix A as a starting point for Centers to define their specific 
needs.
Digital data deliveries have primarily been represented by digital scans of documents or in nonmachine-readable PDF (scanned/raster format) and stored in a file system or content 
management system. This approach to data interoperability has fallen short in that data delivered 
as part of a page-formatted document lack the relevant context required to effectively leverage 
the data access and interoperability potential inherent to digital assets.
That is not to imply that exchanging digitalized data will solve the data interoperability problem. 
Even digital data replication from system to system presents problems without a computerreadable format that maintains the referential integrity of the data. As an example, experience has 
indicated that the manual replication of data from one application to another could typically 
create a discrepancy in 40 percent of the transferred data (refer to NIMA-RPT-004, Future Data 
Exchange for NASA Programs). The disposition of that amount of data, per transfer, increases 
the argument for standardization to bring about affordability and sustainability.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
143 of 217
Proper data interoperability capability is achieved through the identification of IT standards and 
the application of contractual methods to ensure implementation and alleviate the data 
interoperability limitations that currently challenge NASA’s programs/projects. Multiple options 
for data interoperability among NASA Centers and programs/projects with contractors, industry, 
partners, academia, services, and platforms exist. This section provides information to ensure 
that solution maturity is aligned with organizational requirements, proper data formats are 
applied, and data transmission types are understood. In addition, guidance on contract language 
is included to enable successful preparation of an RFP on data interoperability in Appendix B. 
Digital data standardization provides:
a. Consistency of data and data use across systems.
b. Minimal redundant data collection and entry.
c. Maximum utilization of relevant technology.
d. Improved audit trail accessibility. 
e. Rapid retrieval of the audit trail, enabling:
(1) Better informed, real-time management decisions concerning changes. 
(2) Increased quality in CDM and control. 
(3) Support for effectiveness of analyses of metrics.
(4) Improved data acquisition times.
(5) Improved data review and integration for:
A. Elimination or reduction of outdated or discrepant data copied into nonauthoritative sources.
B. Elimination of manual management of relationships between data.
MIL-STD-31000B, Technical Data Packages, definesthe following:
a. Three-dimensional intelligent (3Di) technical data—a 3D viewable representation of 
an item provided in a widely available software format (e.g. ISO 32000-1, Document 
management — Portable document format — Part 1: PDF 1.7). This representation details the 
complete technical description of the required design configuration to include, but is not limited 
to, geometry, topology, relationships, tolerances, attributes, metadata, and other features 
necessary to define a component or assembly.
b. 3Di format—the standard arrangement and organization of information within a 3Di 
viewable representation of an item. This includes such features as the size and arrangement of 
information blocks (e.g. title blocks), notes, lists, revision information, view states, restriction 
notices, and the use of optional or supplemental blocks (see related term “Drawing Format”).
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
144 of 217
c. Type 3D—3D TDP. Type 3D will include one or more of the following as specified 
in the contract and TDP Option Selection Worksheet:
(1) 3D native models.
(2) 2D drawings derived from the 3D native models.
(3) 3Di PDF viewable data derived from the 3D native models.
(4) Neutral files derived from the 3D native models (e.g. JT, STEP, etc.).
ISO 10303-242, Industrial automation systems and integration — Product data representation 
and exchange —Part 242: Application protocol: Managed model-based 3D engineering, is the 
merging of two ISO standards:
 Aerospace's STEP ISO 10303-203, Industrial automation systems and integration —
Product data representation and exchange — Part 203: Application protocol: 
Configuration controlled 3D design of mechanical parts and assemblies, and
 Automotive's STEP ISO 10303-214, Industrial Automation Systems and Integration –
Product Data Representation and Exchange – Part 214: Application Protocol: Core 
data for automotive mechanical design processes.
Digital data standardization should be specified when:
a. The potential for reuse of data exists; reuse may not be the same as for reviews or 
other occasions to "revisit" the data.
b. A need exists for interoperability of standardized data among NASA Centers and 
programs/projects with contractors, industry, partners, academia, services, and platforms.
c. The need to provide relationships between data for performing program/project 
management, systems engineering, and operational functions exists.
An acquisition framework creates the foundation and baseline from which all other collaborative 
MBE projects and programs should be driven. Interoperability and collaboration between NASA 
(and their Government Centers and JPL) and commercial program partners is a daily event, and 
the need for an updated process for dealing with digital data is required. 
It is critical and incumbent for the program/project to review, redefine, and reuse current and 
applicable NPRs as well as handbooks and collateral, including, but not limited to, DRDs, 
PDLM, and systems engineering to accommodate model-based sharing and milestone delivery at 
KDPs in Pre-Phase A through Phase F. 
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
145 of 217
The collaboration framework is being driven not only by NASA standards and needs but also by 
leveraging commercially defined leading and best practices. The goal is optimum model 
exchange definition with consideration for current to trending Government and industry needs.
Guiding principles for data collaboration include:
a. Data as an essential enabler should be made visible, accessible, and understandable to 
any potential user as early as possible in the program/project’s life cycle to support project and 
mission objectives as constrained by security and access needs. 
b. Data assets should be made visible by creating and associating metadata (“tagging”), 
including, but not limited to, discovery metadata, for each asset.
c. Developed metadata standards should comply with applicable national and 
international consensus standards for metadata interoperability; all metadata should be 
retrievable using the NASA Centers’ systems with requirements to access the metadata. 
d. Data assets should be accessible by making data available in shared spaces; all data 
assets should be accessible to all users at the NASA Center except where limited by law, policy, 
or security classification.
e. Data that is accessible to all users at the NASA Center should conform to that 
Center’s specified data publication methods that are consistent with the Center’s current and 
planned information systems capabilities.
f. To enable trust, data assets should have associated information assurance and security 
metadata and an identified authoritative contractor and/or Center-level source for the data.
g. Data interoperability should be enabled through business and mission processes 
reusing the Center’s information system capabilities. 
h. Semantic and structural agreements for data interoperability should be promoted 
through communities consisting of data users (producers and consumers) and system developers.
i. Data interoperability concepts and practices should be incorporated into education 
and awareness training and Center-level processes.
j. Programs/projects should acquire the minimum essential contractor-originated data 
required to meet all program/project life-cycle requirements.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
146 of 217
k. Program/project managers and delegated Technical Authorities should consider data 
requirements for future procurement needs in a manner that fosters competitive procurement 
opportunities.
Three process domains require initial focus for MBE process interoperability:
a. Data collaboration (the definition and management of data, including models, 
requirements, CAD parts, CAD model libraries, and other mechanisms that contribute to a 
complete and valid design through design, development, test, and evaluation (DDT&E)).
b. Engineering release (the very beginning of design data CDM where engineering 
designs are created, checked, and status is reported).
c. Integrated product structure (the core mechanism around which the relationships 
between detail product design elements are defined). 
Processes are to be implemented concurrently, authorized via institutional mechanisms such as 
NPRs and standards, and used as expected by trained and supported end users.
Process interoperability also involves inventorying existing mechanisms such as currently 
deployed capabilities and other application systems (e.g. approved parts list may be in another 
database), locally approved processes, and the expected practices articulated in project plans, 
contractor practices, or external standards called out in contract language. 
Centers have their own documents and implementations inside systems of these processes, and 
there may be multiples of each. So, interoperability must be addressed to:
a. Elaborate on the definition of the process domain.
b. Eliminate or reduce risk as a main thrust of collaborative decision making.
c. Focus on systems of systems impact across all boundaries.
d. Collect data on the current state of things—who has what solutions in place now, in 
what form, how extensive, what problem does it attack, are they usable outside of any given 
Center, what is their effectiveness, etc.
e. Create operational concepts (abstract, user-centric interactions) that convey the 
desired outcome in a solution-independent way.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
147 of 217
f. Generate multiple solutions and do trade studies on those solutions leading to 
recommendation(s), with rationale.
g. Identify the impact of recommendations.
D.4 Digital Collaboration Framework and Environment
Data today is generally electronic; and as the design environment continues to move toward a 
models-based approach, engineering/acquisition processes are more automated and demand a 
highly collaborative/social workforce during all phases of the life cycle for effective utilization 
and collaboration of MBE information (i.e. model-based “DATA”—Design and Definition, 
Systems Engineering, Simulation and Test).
Additionally, with the advent of digital definition and the ability to annotate these model-based 
artifacts, non-graphical definition can be represented in the model definition and can include:
a. DRDs for collaboration governance, contracts definition, and enforcement to properly 
define KDP deliverables per contracted levels and per interoperability definition and 
expectations.
b. Safety and Mission Assurance (SMA) problem reporting and corrective action, 
hardware screening, reliability, failure mode and effects analysis/critical items lists, etc.
c. Operations, when the system is on-orbit operational and mission operations needs 
access to the authoritative data.
d. Management oversight and awareness when management needs access to the 
dashboard to see if any trends were previously identified.
e. Software interoperability with the ability to insert new software modules and the Data 
Architecture allow for software upgrades while maintaining configuration.
f. Common data schema.
g. Standards-based-driven requirements.
h. Configuration and data management of the models to ensure data integrity and model 
validation.
i. Risk and risk mitigation.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
148 of 217
The collaboration framework addresses the acquisition and storage of all program/project data,
including the following:
a. Product/program definition. 
b. Data collaboration framework (from acquisition through retirement). 
c. Data definition (model-based design for “x,” where “x” represents different artifacts).
d. Systems engineering. 
e. Requirements management. 
f. Mechatronics management. 
g. CM. 
h. Engineering revision and version control.
i. Risk management.
j. Other artifacts developed within the product life cycle.
The data definition principles require aligning the organizational governance model and the 
technology, taking into account the following scenarios and guiding principles:
a. Today’s product data requires special handling due to its dependence on technologies 
such as system modeling (SysML™) and 3D CAD.
b. Product data is created and usable in different forms (lightweight and native) by 
different communities across the full product life cycle.
c. Minimizing the building of custom solutions and customizing out-of-the-box software 
and rely on external standards and configurability. 
d. NASA standards for naming and CDM are followed to ensure proper DRD 
compliance, expected search and capture results, and effective communication.
e. Institutional knowledge is leveraged from MBE implementers across NASA and their 
ecosystem to provide a consistent approach to MBE.
D.5 Collaboration Definition and Environment 
Collaboration should consist of a virtual development environment that allows immediate, 
secured access to all product data via light-weight visualization tools. Without effective 
collaboration, team members who are not co-located are forced to share documents using e-mail, 
zip files, and/or a shared server; use multiple tools for collaboration that could manipulate the 
native format or that could transfer insufficient product information; and always search for the 
latest version of record.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
149 of 217
The MBE collaboration environment creates a development environment that represents all types 
of “digital” data, including, but not limited to, specifications, requirements, analysis results, and 
legal entities, and instills a flexible discipline-enabling access to the right information at the right 
time to the right people. The MBE collaboration environment, when leveraged and deployed 
correctly, can have a major impact on mitigating risk, reducing cycle time, improving quality, 
and ultimately, cost savings. It also allows for a quick and robust way to make decisions while 
not incurring any cost on physical prototypes or models. In the end, it is a means toward 
reducing risk by aiding the decision-making process.
Organizations embracing an MBE collaboration environment vision define the following four 
themes as what makes or breaks a successful execution:
a. Integrity of the data—having the latest and most correct data from the onset 
(whether internal or within the contracts that define the exchange of information). The data have 
to be complete as well as consistent, making sure that the right information is available. DRDs 
will define the level of depth and detail needed, as well as how that information can be 
exchanged to ensure integrity is enforced.
b. Virtual access anytime/anywhere—global sharing, including security and 
safeguarding of data, as well as supply chain enablement, is critical to handling complex systems 
from both a push and pull perspective as part of operational workflow. This capability is critical 
for operations such as engineering release or change management, making sure the data is 
available at the right time to the right people. The completeness and integrity of the data and 
ability to access information 24 hours, 7 days a week are expected. 
c. Discipline in integrated product definition-driven development—stemming from 
the integrated product structure, including options and variants. Once the structure is defined, 
management of configurations and changes needs to be scalable as well as enforced. 
d. Visualization—just beginning to be referred to as “virtualization”—using lightweight and intelligent visualization software that is capable of total product representation and 
animation for form and fit decisions, analysis, management, and assembly. 
Successful product development for NASA relies on some key capabilities as follows:
a. Visibility and management of requirements throughout the product development 
process.
b. Access to a more complete “data model” at any time during the development process 
that represents an intelligent and fully defined artifact versus an amassing of multiple documents 
from remote resources.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
150 of 217
c. More informed decision making for the appropriate selection of design strategy.
d. Ability to better leverage and enable the different program/project levels and primes 
by bringing them closer to the product development life-cycle phase and decision process.
e. Ability to reuse products and processes and incorporate new requirements as 
needed/when needed.
f. Flexibility for domain autonomy built into product design and manufacturing 
processes.
g. Validation of functional product and process capability to ensure that products meet 
the needs of the Agency and that processes work effectively.
While MBE can provide value and help achieve some of these technical goals, it will not be 
totally successful without changes in many domains. Development of an MBE collaboration 
environment is essential in fully achieving these goals. As a part of executing an MBE 
collaboration environment strategy, desired data end states have to be converted into more 
specific objectives as follows:
a. Pre-release Data Sharing—
(1) When serving as systems integrator, engineering data have to be shared with other 
engineering groups, including to and from primes, prior to formal engineering 
release. 
(2) Vertical data movement (e.g. downward for requirements, upward for analysis 
results) supports decision making but does not support the horizontal and diagonal 
flow of data, especially CAD and other specialized data. The question was how to 
keep track of which version of the model was used and for what. 
(3) Today, if a problem is found in that model, the capabilities to share such data may 
outstrip the organizational capacity to facilitate and monitor it. MBSE, along with 
M&S, does a very good job of defining the infrastructure that defines access and 
what is required to answer many of these questions; but it is the MBE 
collaboration environment framework (as defined by the other initiatives) that 
makes the access and sharing possible.
b. Distributed, Non-Document-Centric Authority—
(1) Product structures and designs are just some of the data managed in systems. 
They cannot serve their purpose if the electronic version is not authoritative. 
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
151 of 217
(2) On many projects, authority for design is distributed unequally: the number of 
data objects to be reviewed and approved increases non-linearly as one goes 
DOWN the product hierarchy. 
(3) Furthermore, the distributed vehicle elements are simultaneously in different 
design states; highly distributed authority combined with the interlinked data 
structures of CAD complicates the dynamics of intra-element flow of design data.
c. Process, Tool, and Use Synchronization—
(1) In an MBE collaboration environment, the processes and workflows are 
implemented in the tool suite and provide real value when they are actually used. 
(2) The engineering release definition, as well as NPR 7123.1, defines this model; 
and MBE can act as the framework to ensure that the right data is available at the 
right time.
d. Handling Data Objects—
(1) The larger picture of significant design data being created by primes and partners 
really shines a spotlight on scalability and usability challenges experienced today 
around handling objects within MBE environments. Definition of the need for the 
model and its attributes is blurred; therefore, native data (which can be very large 
in itself) carries a lot of unnecessary baggage that will never be used by the 
recipient. 
(2) New ways of thinking are needed about what it means to make a “delivery,” to 
“receive” and/or “use” a model (or representation), which then needs to be 
properly reflected in the DRD clause, to “release” a design, and how to deal with 
ownership, change, and configuration control around complex data entities that 
are still actively being defined and do not behave like PDF files or drawings.
e. Having a Voice—
(1) NASA has dynamic needs because the mission is research, science, and 
exploration. The mission is to do things that have not been done before. 
(2) When processes are linked to tools and one cannot do the job without the data that 
is in them, a move toward processes enabled by technology is necessary:
A. Who gets to decide on the requirements for the application? 
B. Who gets to influence the decision on the trade analysis results? 
C. Who gets to move their problem to the top of the “to do” list? 
(3) Governance has to recognize the needs of different users to be heard at different 
times, and the infrastructure has to support it.
f. Data Usability and Collaboration—
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
152 of 217
(1) Capability deployment that maps to defined user communities. Achieving this 
landscape will require both technical and process solutions to be designed, built, 
configured, tested, deployed, used, and supported. 
(2) Additional attention to enable the move from document centricity to data will 
require focus on new practices, including contract language (DRD clauses) and 
supporting tools, around specification of technical data packages, and the conduct 
of CDM.
D.6 Collaboration Planning and Development
MBE is a critical element with technical and programmatic implications. Management at the 
Agency, Mission Directorates, programs/projects and their delegated Technical Authority(s)
have the responsibility to determine the following at their respective levels:
a. How much should be risked (or how much should the program/project pay) to ensure 
the relevant data exist and are accessible, discoverable, and understandable to support such 
events as some in-flight anomaly 10 or more years in the future?
b. Where should the Agency and the program/project invest their limited attention and 
resources on data during the development cycle?
The MBE Plan (refer to Appendix J for guidance in developing the Plan) documents the 
foundation for these decisions. The program/project managers and the delegated Technical 
Authority(s) sign and release the Plan prior to the completion of the System Definition Review 
(SDR). A program/project’s compliance with NPR 7120.5 is verified by submission of the initial 
preliminary Plan. A program/project manager and the delegated Technical Authority(s) require 
support in the development of the strategy and the Plan. 
The Program Manager and delegated Technical Authority(s) are responsible for documenting in 
the MBE Plan the scope of each Center's responsibilities and partner/prime or supplier 
requirements for collaboration, including: 
a. The implementation approaches.
b. The environment in which the program and its projects' MBE solution(s) operates. 
c. The level of digital maturity required for decision enablement and effective passing of 
digital information.
d. The timing for implementation of the MBE solution and associated processes, data, 
elements, attributes, and formats.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
153 of 217
e. Proof of compliance.
The MBE solution architect, program/project manager, and the delegated Technical Authority(s)
are supporting roles that may assist in the development of a program/project management team 
by providing technical program/project strategy and oversight leadership support and advising 
the program/project manager and the delegated Technical Authority(s) on how to facilitate 
knowledge transfer, education, technical direction, and consultation from program/project 
beginning to end of life as follows:
a. Long term—Focusing on the end-to-end enterprise-level system/solution design and 
roll-out strategies that drive toward implementation delivery (associated with) and sustainment 
of the following:
(1) Identification and development of the technology roadmap based on desired end 
state.
(2) Process alignment and optimization by proper application of enabling 
technologies.
(3) Design consultation, including security, authentication, authorization, and 
integration.
(4) Product capability deployment, features, and functionality.
(5) Automation processes and methodologies.
(6) Knowledge management, best practices, and reuse strategies.
(7) Performance of the role of the senior technical designer on the project. 
(8) Drive the linkage/enablement of the designed architecture to domain processes 
such as CDM, engineering release, change management, etc.
(9) Lead the development of the system and application architecture definition and 
application configuration, including:
A. Hardware and software components of the system.
B. Interfaces and interoperability.
C. Infrastructure and security.
D. Performance and reliability.
E. Administration and access control.
F. Maintenance and sustainment over time.
b. Near Term—Focusing on architecture implementation of next delivery milestones 
by the following:
(1) Lead and drive the development and review of all related infrastructure, 
architecture, and design components.
(2) Lead the development of the system description and architecture design. 
(3) Lead the development of any customization designs.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
154 of 217
(4) Lead the technical review of the use-case scenarios, requirements, and 
deployment decisions.
(5) Chair and conduct design, code, and configuration reviews allowing project 
management to enforce consistency with the overall technical architecture.
In addition, the following personnel have the responsibility to participate on the program/project 
management team in the stated capacities:
a. Tool Implementation Lead:
(1) Conducts the installation of the tool (software, etc.) and third-party applications.
(2) Configures and sustains the tools/applications following installation of the tool by 
the Agency CIO, or designee, including:
A. Access control.
B. Data/folder structures.
C. Workflow design and configuration.
D. System test and validation.
E. Data migration.
F. Data retrieval from external systems.
G. Development of test scripts.
b. Process Lead:
(1) Leads the definition of overall business requirements (key process areas and 
indicators).
(2) Leads the gathering and analysis of solution and system capability/functionality. 
(3) Leads the assessment of as-is business process documentation and gap 
identification of process documentation.
(4) Leads the definition and documentation of business use cases via concepts of 
operations.
(5) Interfaces with the solution architects regarding system capability to ensure 
defined processes are achievable within the technology and within 
program/project milestone constraints.
(6) Analyzes complex customer business process requirements to evaluate 
alternatives and identify options within the solution system architecture.
(7) Ensures the development of process definition and use-case documentation.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
155 of 217
APPENDIX E
ARCHITECTURE
E.1 PURPOSE
Collaborating within and outside NASA will be greatly enhanced through digital and modelbased methods. This Appendix provides guidance for a consistent architectural framework, 
which is necessary to ensure compatibility.
E.2 MODEL-DRIVEN ARCHITECTURE
The OMG initiative defines model-driven architecture (MDA), which is leveraged by several 
standards such as Meta-Object Facility, XMI, common warehouse metamodel (CWM), Common 
Object Request Broker Architecture (CORBA), and Unified Modeling Language (UML). The 
former approach relied on Executable UML and Object Constraint Language (OCL) instead, and 
query/view/transformation (QVT).
MBA’s "eco-system" of programming and modelling tools are represented in general terms by 
the Eclipse Modeling Framework. This framework allows the creation of tools implementing the 
MDA standards of the OMG; but, it is also possible to use it to implement other modelingrelated tools.
NASA believes that existing standards do not provide sufficient resolution to create collaborative 
models; therefore, the establishment of an Agency-level collaborative environment and 
architecture is critical for program success. Other NASA Technical Handbooks will be 
developed to reflect more information toward recognizing and implementing the appropriate 
architecture. 
Discussion goes deeper and reviews the implementation of MBE requirements for the 
establishment of Agency-level collaborative environment types. Implementation of MBE 
requires the establishment of an Agency-level collaborative environment and architecture 
defined as four types of architectures:
a. Security. 
b. Information Support System.
c. Data.
d. Process. 
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
156 of 217
E.3 Architecture Rationale
Collaborating within and outside of NASA will be greatly enhanced through digital and modelbased methods. A consistent architectural framework is necessary to ensure compatibility. 
Existing standards do not provide sufficient resolution to create collaborative models.
In accordance with the life cycle in NPR 7120.5 (with tailoring for projects less rigorous than a 
flight project), the life cycle for this activity follows:
a. Pre-Phase A: Define the mission and study multiple approaches to the framework.
b. Phase A: Define top-level architectural framework requirements and select a single 
approach.
c. Phase B: Complete architectural framework requirements and perform preliminary 
design of architectural framework.
d. Phase C/D: Complete and build the framework.
Goddard Space Mission Architecture Framework (GSMAF) follows ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010 and 
other community standards such as NPR 7120.5 and NPR 7123.1. GSMAF is structured to 
address needs and concerns of primary stakeholders for Goddard Space Flight Center science 
missions:
• Science Viewpoint – What do the Principal Investigator and Science Team care 
about?
• Systems Engineering Viewpoints – How do we design, build, and test “The 
System?”
‒ Requirements – What are the necessary and sufficient aspects of the product(s) 
that will execute the Mission?
‒ Product Design – What are the definition/designs of the product(s) elements 
necessary to execute the Mission?
‒ Realization Viewpoint – How do I build, integrate, and test the product elements?
• Management – How do we manage a team and resources to design, deliver, and 
operate the product(s) to execute the Mission?
‒ Project Development Viewpoint – What are the project schedule, budget, risk, 
resources, and organization required to define and deliver the product(s)?
‒ Operations Viewpoint – What are the plans, rules, and procedures for “Mission 
Operations?”
 Enterprise Viewpoint – How does the effort currently align with programmatic and 
institutional policy, direction, reporting, and resources?
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
157 of 217
E.3.1 Security Architecture
The Security Architecture exists to ensure continuity of Mission Directorate operations for both 
flight projects and ground operations through the management of risks and vulnerabilities to 
protect humans, flight and ground facilities, information, systems, and services against disasters, 
threats, errors, and manipulation. 
The Security Architecture is a collection of components or layers of security that provide 
information assurance. These include policy and security management, application security, data 
security, platform security, network and perimeter security, physical security, and user identity 
security. It provides the program/project with reliability, quality, integrity, availability, and 
confidentiality of data and systems in compliance with Federal and Agency regulations and 
requirements. 
It is the responsibility of the Agency CIO to develop the Security Architecture as defined in 
NPR 2800.1, Managing Information Technology, and NPR 2810.1.
The program/project managers and the NASA Chief Engineer, or delegated Technical 
Authority(s), have the responsibility to ensure that appropriate IT elements and approved IT 
security plans are in place and address the elements as required by their Center-level procedural 
requirements documents.
E.3.2 Information Support System Architecture (ISSA)
The ISSA is comprised of IT components allowing users to access all model-based definition 
data under a configuration-managed, secure environment. The ISSA allows programs/projects to 
capture, integrate, and manage product and process information from diverse authoring 
applications in a single environment. 
This MBE environment enables the definition and standardization of workflow-driven processes 
that can be leveraged and used across multiple programs/projects. The ISSA is designed to 
integrate multiple mission-critical systems through the use of industry standards in MBE (e.g. 
open application programming interfaces [APIs] and enterprise service buses) to aggregate and 
extend knowledge sharing throughout the organization. It is the responsibility of the Agency CIO 
to develop the ISSA. 
The Agency CIO has the responsibility to ensure that IT and information resources are acquired 
and managed in a manner that implements the requirements, procedures, and priorities defined 
by NPR 2800.1 and ensure that IT products, services, and information systems meet customer 
and stakeholder requirements.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
158 of 217
E.3.3 Data Architecture 
A Data Architecture describes how data are processed, stored, and utilized in a given system or 
product definition. It provides criteria for data processing operations that make it possible to 
design data flows and also control the flow and association of data in the system. If 
programs/projects do not have the Data Architecture from the start, the program/project data 
becomes disorganized quickly and is nearly impossible to electronically integrate or discover as 
the level of data increases over time.
The Data Architecture provides for creation, storage, and exchange of data, especially PDD, 
models and simulations, and for the requirements imposed on the MBE solution elements to 
support data interoperability, management, integration, metadata, and work practices, including, 
but not limited to, standardized taxonomies and ontologies, and should be based on common, 
open standards or NASA standards.
The Data Architecture processes and requirements have to be flexible to accommodate changes 
in MBE vendors, NASA Center and institutional software, and environments and allow the 
inclusion of external suppliers or partners that use their own local MBE environment or do not 
currently support an MBE environment. 
The CIO provides the infrastructure/systems for implementing an architecture that supports the 
creation, storage, interoperability, and exchange of data. Engineering defines the program/project 
data that the architecture has to support and the criteria for data processing operations, data 
flows, and the association of data in the system. Further, engineering supplies the requirements 
for the infrastructure/systems needed to meet these criteria. The program/project manager and 
delegated Technical Authority(s) are responsible for ensuring that the Data Architecture meets 
the program/project’s needs. The program/project Data Architecture should be defined and 
documented in the MBE Plan.
E.3.4 Process Architecture
Processes enable the integration of diverse human and systems activities to coordinate the 
exchange of services and data/information, including process design, process execution, and 
process monitoring. A Process Architecture is a description of the program/project business 
processes. The Process Architecture establishes standards in how the program/project will create, 
manage, and control program/project data. A Process Architecture describes data interoperability 
requirements at defined life-cycle states and maturity levels (both internally and externally to 
NASA); describes which processes will be applied across all projects (e.g. safety and mission 
assurance, deviations and waivers, corrective actions, and problem resolution); and identifies the 
source for documented common nomenclatures and schemes for product naming, numbering, 
and version control.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
159 of 217
The MBE Process Architecture defines flow of the program/project data, the roles and 
responsibilities for data handling, and the approval authority. The Process Architecture should 
clearly define, control, and integrate business and engineering processes for program/project 
execution based on results from life-cycle cost analyses. Processes should be subjected to valueadded analysis techniques (e.g. streamlined, efficient, effective processes) prior to 
implementation. A well-defined Process Architecture will ensure that every person or 
organization involved executes the process. Each process to be used is fully documented so that 
everyone understands their respective involvement in the process.
The program/project manager and delegated Technical Authority(s) are responsible for defining 
the relationship between businesses and engineering processes and documenting these 
relationships in the MBE Plan. The Agency CIO and applicable Mission Directorate are 
responsible for implementing the requirements of the Process Architecture 
If established early and properly, the key benefit of the MBE Process Architecture is that all 
program/project team members will clearly understand data control and release, including which 
data are authoritative and the process through which the data are released to become 
authoritative.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
160 of 217
APPENDIX F
INTEROPERABILITY STANDARDS
F.1 PURPOSE
This Appendix provides guidance for establishing the proper data interoperability capability. In 
recognition of adopting a true collaborative MBE environment, NASA needs to adopt industry 
standards and approaches for digital data interoperability, which will enable data interoperability 
and move beyond the storage of raw, uncorrelated data. 
The true benefit of a model-based environment may not be seen at the Center or authoring level; 
however, upstream and downstream users are hugely impacted as the amount of work required to 
validate or modify the completeness or correctness of the data being shared increases. NASASTD-7009, Standard for Models and Simulations, provides requirements for determining the 
credibility and integrity of model-based results and model application. 
Furthermore, a model-based environment as part of an MBE strategy also covers the integrity 
(security, relationships, revision currency, effectivities, interoperability, standards compliance, 
etc.) of the data. 
F.2 INTEROPERABILITY
Table 5, System and CAD Model Interoperability Insights for Project Data Acquisition and 
Exchange, illustrates use of data in a models-based environment, in particular for 3D CAD 
interoperability, and how to facilitate better planning and acquisition of design data.
Table 5—System and CAD Model Interoperability Insights for Project Data Acquisition 
and Exchange
If we want to: we would need model-based definition (annotations and 
properties):
Perform design 
and design intent 
integrations
Pre-release models (systems and CAD) with data appropriate for 
the life-cycle phase to defined (high) accuracy based on negotiated 
agreement between provider and user.
Subcontract part 
of design work
To send contractor requirements, skeleton files, start parts, 
approved parts lists, BOMs, etc., and receive back from them 
design files, component models, and other elements of the product 
definition package.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
161 of 217
If we want to: we would need model-based definition (annotations and 
properties):
Take over design 
change authority
Full design history, systems, and CAD models for a given vehicle 
block, including skeletons, standard parts, start parts, drawings, 
configuration settings, and model-checking criteria.
Conduct design 
review
3D “viewable” of released models or external alternative 
representations that support annotations and analysis.
Do derivative 
designs such as 
Ground Support 
Equipment
Pre-release CAD and system models from source at defined 
maturity level treated as “released” by users within their own 
environment with associated metadata appropriate for the lifecycle phase.
Do modeling and 
simulations 
Pre-release alternative (system and analytical models) 
representations with full definition of items significant for 
modeling and simulation with data appropriate for the life-cycle 
phase.
Re-bid 
production
Released CAD models, drawings, material specifications, 
manufacturing processes, installation models, etc.
Do physical 
integration and 
verification (e.g.
at Product 
Assembly 
Building)
Released alternative representations or source system definitions, 
requirements, and CAD with appropriate alternative representation 
substitutions with full definition of items at integration point (but 
lacking internal detail) with data appropriate for the life-cycle 
phase.
Define contents 
of Acceptance 
Data Package
CAD needs based on defining requirements—who/what/when/how 
models will be used—to ensure that they are the right lifecycle/maturity state, format, and contain needed content.
Perform Concept 
Development and
Refinement
Surface, shape, parametric, possibly detail design or as-is (for 
existing systems) and “will-be” (for future systems) model and 
simulation data.
F.3 Exchanging and Distributing Models
To ensure data transportability and integrity, the need for NASA to adopt industry standards and 
approaches for digital data interoperability is required to enable data interoperability and move 
beyond the storage of raw, uncorrelated data.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
162 of 217
Proper data interoperability capability is only achieved through the identification of IT standards 
and the application of contractual methods to ensure implementation and alleviate the data 
interoperability limitations that currently challenge NASA’s programs/projects. 
Multiple options for data interoperability among NASA Centers and programs/projects with 
contractors, industry, partners, academia, services, and platforms exist. For example:
 CAD systems are all moving toward 3D digital formats as their means of the 
authoritative source and definition. Exchanging 3D data within engineering 
departments, between primes, and with other divisions and departments is critical to 
program/project development; however, not all of these use the same CAD system. 
 When parts are developed in 3D, the data is initially stored in the original format in 
the authoring system (or PLM) of the software used to design the part; but, when the 
need to share/collaborate occurs, a neutral 3D format is necessary. (Refer to NIMARPT-004). In general, a neutral 3D format as the medium for collaboration should be 
selected. 
Note: The program/project manager and delegated Technical Authority(s) have the 
responsibility to identify and acquire essential contractor-originated data with sufficient access 
and usage rights to support not only the full program/project life cycle, but also the enterprise 
needs of the Mission Directorate and Agency as a whole. Contractor data interoperability is 
achieved through identification of IT standards and guidance on contract language.
F.4 Standards
Table 4 illustrates use of data in a models-based environment, in particular for 3D CAD 
interoperability and how to facilitate better planning and acquisition of design data.
F.5 Model-Based Engineering Standards Elements
The well-defined MBE environment should:
a. Host the library used for authoritative (x) CAD designs.
b. Provide a distinguished security and access model for the libraries that restricts all 
changes to a designated set of librarians.
c. Provide efficient mechanisms for managing large families of similar items.
d. Prevent or reduce the occurrence of duplicate or multiple part numbers and 
designations for an identical physical device; a part number should map to a specific, unique set 
of specifications.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
163 of 217
e. Address the maintenance of additional metadata for standard parts such as standard 
identifiers, extensions for tracking the configuration of mission sets, and effectivities which map 
revisions/versions to the extensions.
f. Manage the parts data developed by the design organizations developing the product.
g. Allow for inclusion of new libraries and mechanisms as new organizations enter the 
environment, new suppliers are added, and parts suppliers are consolidated or removed from the 
marketplace.
h. Provide for library availability for the required life cycle of the program/project.
i. Host the library used for requirements development and requirement-to-part 
associations.
F.6 Industry Standards for Data Interoperability 
Table 6, Target Industry Standards for Data Interoperability Formats, provides guidance for 
industry standard data interoperability formats that are well suited for relational and object model 
data interoperability implementations at the time of this document’s release. For reference 
documents, see Appendix K.
The interoperability formats in Table 6 are based on the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C)
11
Internet Standard: XML and supporting protocols. These standards are specific to the applicable 
data interoperability formats in maturity level 3 in Table 8.
Table 6—Target Industry Standards for Data Interoperability Formats
Standard Short Description Industry Organization
1 Extensible Markup Language 
(XML), version 1.1
Extensible rules for encoding 
documents
W3C
2 Namespaces in XML, version 
1.1
Rules for uniquely naming elements 
and attributes
W3C
3XML Schema Definition 
(XSD)12, version 1.1
Defines the structure, content, and 
semantics of XML documents
W3C
4XML Metadata Interchange 
(XMI), versions 2.1.1 and 2.1
Standard for exchanging metadata 
information via XML
OMG
The STEP Application Protocols 
(AP) ISO 10303 
Standard for the Exchange of Product 
(STEP) model data for systems 
engineering 
ISO
 
11 World Wide Web Consortium, http://www.w3.org/
12XSD is a schema whose purpose is to document the elements of the XML document, their meaning, and their 
structure.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
164 of 217
Note Standard Definitions:
1. 1XML: XML is a simple, very flexible text format derived from Standard 
Generalized Markup Language (SGML), ISO 8879, Information processing – Text 
and office systems – Standard Generalized Markup Language (SGML). Originally 
designed to meet the challenges of large-scale electronic publishing, XML is also 
playing an increasingly important role in the interoperability of a wide variety of data 
on the Web and elsewhere.
2. 2 Namespaces in XML: XML Namespaces13 are a simple and straightforward way to 
distinguish names used in XML documents. XML Namespaces provide a simple 
method for qualifying element and attribute names by associating them with 
namespaces identified by Uniform Resource Identifier (URI)14 references.
3. 3XML Schema: XML Schemas (per XSD) express shared vocabularies and allow 
machines to carry out rules made by people. They provide a means for defining the 
structure, content, and semantics of XML documents in more detail.
4. 4OMG XML Metadata Interchange (XMI): The main purpose of XMI (ISO/IEC 
19503, Information technology – XML Metadata Interchange (XMI), is to enable 
easy interoperability of metadata between application development life-cycle tools 
such as modeling tools based on UML (ISO/IEC 19501, Information technology –
Open Distributed Processing – Unified Modeling Language [UML]), and metadata 
repositories/frameworks based on the Meta Object Facility [MOF]) (ISO/IEC 19502, 
Information technology – Meta Object Facility [MOF]), in distributed heterogeneous 
environments. XMI integrates the following three key industry standards:
a. XML.
b. UML, an OMG modeling specification (ISO/IEC 19501). (Note: XMI is 
expressed as UML and is listed here for completeness.)
c. MOF (ISO/IEC 19502).
5. STEP Application Protocols (APs): "Standard for the Exchange of Product (STEP) 
model data for systems engineering" or ISO 10303 "Industrial automation systems 
and integration — Product data representation and exchange," contains various APs. 
The STEP APs (e.g. ISO 10303, Part 209; Part 210, Industrial automation systems 
and integration - Product data representation and exchange - Application protocol: 
Electronic assembly, interconnect and packaging design; Part 233; Part 238; Part 239; 
or Part 242) capture data on components and systems to improve computer-sensible 
 
13 Namespace in XML1.1, http://www.w3.org/TR/xml-names11/
14 Uniform Resource Identifier, RFC 3986/STD 66 (2005), http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3986
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
165 of 217
sharing of important product information by supporting the capture, interoperability, 
and archive systems engineering information across disciplines and organizations. 
See STEP AP descriptions in K.2, References.
F.7 Interoperability and Sustainability
Program/project managers and delegated Technical Authorities are responsible for determining 
the MBE interoperability and sustainability requirements and ensuring these are identified across 
all participating organizations and in all program/project contracts. Inclusion of international 
partners could have a different set of interoperability and sustainability requirements that would 
need to be addressed. The following provides guidance to assist with the development of these 
requirements. 
Common problems related to interoperability are listed in Table 7, Common Problems Related to 
Interoperability.
Table 7—Common Problems Related to Interoperability
Issue Activity/Problem Examples 
Requirements 
Interoperability
 Determine whether requirements are ready for use by another 
department or engineer in a work group.
 Determine level of requirements and specification usage.
 Rework due to incompatible requirements settings.
Modeling and 
Simulation 
Results 
 Identify the models affected by a change or updates as a result of 
modeling and simulation results. 
 Determine whether design data exist and are in a status to be used 
for decision enablement or procurement.
 Identify all interfaces and navigate to the interface definition 
document/design object. 
 Link system design, analysis, and validation.
CAD 
Interoperability
 Determine whether CAD (ECAD and MCAD) files are ready for use 
by another engineer in a work group.
 Determine level of CAD file usage.
 Rework due to incompatible CAD settings. 
Product 
Definition
 Identify the software affected by a change in hardware. 
 Determine whether design data exist and are in a status to be used 
for procurement*.
 Identify all interfaces and navigate to the interface definition 
document/design object*. 
 Link part design (e.g. CAD) to one or more specific requirement 
records**.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
166 of 217
Issue Activity/Problem Examples 
Part 
Identification 
and Naming
 Avoid CAD file name conflicts when combining CAD data from 
multiple sources. 
 Compare the definition of two product configurations to be used for 
analysis.
 Reduce error and confusion over nomenclature.
Model 
Definition
 Identify when an alternative representation of a CAD file needs to be 
updated (e.g. a detail part on a subassembly changes and when other 
CAD models get updated). 
 Identify all interfaces and navigate to the interface definition 
document/design object*. 
Common 
Hardware 
Handling
 Find and replace all instances of a specific part that are in a certain 
life-cycle state*. 
 Identify common hardware parts even when provided by different 
design sources. 
 Identify parts requiring human flight-rated qualification*.
Product Life 
Cycle
 Confirm the delivery status of product data associated with a 
contract design deliverable. 
 Determine whether design data exist and are in a status to be used 
for procurement*.
 Find and replace all instances of a specific part that are in a certain 
life-cycle state*. 
 Trace the status changes of a part in life cycle (e.g. changes during 
"as-manufactured" state)*. 
 Provide visibility of active engineering changes; show impact on 
next-higher design objects*. 
 Identify product objects not in life-cycle state needed to support their 
higher-level assembly.
Product 
Structure(s)
 Create and approve a product structure(s) from both contractor and 
NASA sources.
 Add the product structure(s) and design data from a subcontractor 
into an existing product structure(s) and control access based on 
approval/acceptance status. 
 Update a branch in a product structure(s) (add, delete, revise) based 
on the product structure(s) received from a contractor. 
 Identify parts requiring human flight-rated qualification*.
 Assess the impact of a part being made obsolete (or otherwise being 
unavailable). 
 Identify the detailed configuration of a major test.
 Trace the status changes of a part within a given life-cycle state*.
* Relies on more than one standard. 
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
167 of 217
** Standard needed to support IT application integration.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
168 of 217
APPENDIX G
USE CASES FOR ESTABLISHING MBE ELEMENTS AND 
INTEROPERABILITY REQUIREMENTS
G.1 PURPOSE
This Appendix provides four use cases to consider when establishing MBE elements and 
interoperability requirements in correlation with Table 6. Understanding neutral format data 
usage allows for the appropriate tools to be selected in the most cost-efficient manner, efficient 
data exchange mechanisms to be established, and for everyone requiring data access to have that 
access at the required level. 
G.2 USE CASES
The use cases are defined as follows:
a. Viewing: 
(1) If the use of a CAD system is not desired, the visualization of engineering data 
using 3D viewers comes into play in a number of different situations: the 
presentation of product data, the representation of 3D models for information 
purposes (e.g. for a design review or marketing), and the realistic representation 
in virtual reality systems.
(2) While the simple viewing of the geometry is sufficient in many cases, in other 
cases, metadata or PMI also needs to be displayed.
(3) The high-performance visualization of large assemblies or design spaces and 
neighboring geometries is often an important criterion.
(4) In cases such as these, it is especially important that simplified representations are 
used.
(5) The most important needs for simplified representations are:
A. The source system-independent representation of the model data (geometry 
and metadata) with the required level of detail.
B. The ability to filter the product structure (e.g. using views or layers).
C. The execution of simple measurements.
D. Representation of PMI.
E. The ability to represent textures and sources of light for applications in the 
area of virtual reality.
F. The availability of easy-to-use, cross-system viewers.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
169 of 217
b. Data Exchange:
(1) In development processes, it may be necessary to exchange exact geometry 
between different authoring systems such as requirements or CAD systems. This 
is, for example, the case if a supplier is using a different CAD system than the one 
used by the manufacturer. 
(2) Another common situation is that one of the development partners makes a 
change to the geometry after it has been exchanged. In this case, merely viewing 
the data is not enough. What is needed is a typical and frequently used modeling 
method involving design in context of existing geometry defined as follows:
A. When exchanging exact geometry, additional information describing the 
product is often needed. In this context, a distinction is made between PMI 
and metadata. While metadata refers to descriptions that consist only of text 
(e.g. information about the author or the release status of a model), PMI is 
often added in the form of 3D annotations, manufacturing notes, and material 
specifications. 
B. This makes a greater demand on the underlying data format and on the 
application doing the processing. Grouping and filter options are needed to 
ensure clarity.
C. Another frequent requirement is that the processing of PMI be possible 
subsequent to data exchange. The protection of intellectual property is also 
playing an increasingly important role in data exchange, and it should 
therefore be possible to take this aspect into consideration and reflected 
properly in the DRD.
(3) The most important items to be considered are:
A. The data format and collaborative model definitions to ensure the transfer of 
exact geometry and the entire product structure.
B. The transfer of metadata, as well as PMI annotations (depending on the 
technical readiness level (TRL) being executed and where a concrete use case 
is involved).
C. Ensuring data integrity, fidelity, and completeness, and one-to-one correlation 
between the original model and the target model.
c. Data Integrity:
(1) Programs/projects are formulated and implemented following various NASA 
directives through multi-disciplinary teams of engineers and other personnel, with 
systems engineers, program/project managers, and delegated Technical 
Authorities working across the other engineering disciplines to achieve integrated 
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
170 of 217
systems on schedule and within budget throughout the program/project life cycle. 
(Refer to NIMA-RTP-002, Data Integrity in NASA Programs and Projects15.) 
(2) A primary use of this data is for making informed decisions by individuals and 
teams, including decisions made at life-cycle reviews involving the evaluation of 
various aspects of the program/project. In each of the life-cycle phases and 
reviews, these multi-disciplinary teams work with a multitude of data related to 
the systems being developed, including requirements, verification requirements, 
test verification requirements, failure modes and effects, risks, hazards, and 
problem reports, among others, and are often linked to each other. In operations, 
the data becomes critical for determining the readiness of the systems, with the 
consequence of poor data integrity having potentially catastrophic effects, 
including loss of mission. 
(3) Two major forms of data integrity have been identified as follows: 
A. Integrity of Data Relative to its Authoritative Source
i. Integrity of data relative to its authoritative source is defined by the field 
of information security as the property that data have not been changed, 
destroyed, or lost in an unauthorized or accidental manner. In the context 
of NASA programs/projects, the most common and actionable form of this 
is the integrity of data relative to its authoritative source across and within 
a program/project. 
ii. Within programs/projects, authoritative sources exist for various types of 
data involving, in many cases, the use of various discipline-specific tools 
and varying instances of the same tool. To conduct integrated analyses and 
reviews using data from one or more disciplines or from one or more 
tools, data from authoritative sources need to be integrated. The common, 
current practice is to manually copy data from its authoritative source into 
other tools, documents, or presentations. From the moment the data is 
copied out of its authoritative source, a risk that the data is out of date 
exists, as changes to data in the authoritative source are not automatically 
made in the manual copy; the integrity of the data from the perspective of 
the authoritative source may be compromised. Existence of data 
discrepancies presents a high probability program/project risk of incorrect 
decisions being made, inadequate integrity of the program/project 
integrated design being represented, or inadequate readiness of 
programs/projects and their associated systems being presented. 
 
15 The referenced white paper NIMA-RTP-002, Data Integrity in NASA Programs and Projects, traces requirements 
for data integrity to NASA Procedural Requirements and describes how data integrity is a critical factor for 
achieving integrity of the program’s integrated design, as well as the readiness of the operational flight and ground 
data systems. It also provides data management lessons learned.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
171 of 217
B. Integrity of Data Relative to an Authoritative Model
i. Integrity of data relative to an authoritative model is defined by the field 
of database systems as the property that data are an accurate reflection of 
the domain of discourse it is attempting to model. In the context of 
NASA programs/projects, the most common and actionable form of this 
is the composite and component integrity of data relative to an 
authoritative model.
ii. Authoritative models of valid forms of data exist, from a single piece of 
data relative to the model of a valid data type, range of data, or simple 
text rules (component data integrity), to more complex data involving 
multiple pieces of data relative to each other and an authoritative model 
(composite data integrity). 
iii. The primary solution for improved data integrity is the use of information 
systems to change from manual processes of data integration and 
validation to automated processes. 
(4) Two main approaches, automated data integration and automated data audits, are 
addressed as follows:
A. Automated Data Integration Relative to Authoritative Sources of Data
i. Goals of using this approach include improved data integrity and data 
accessibility and elevated efficiencies in data management over the full 
program/project life cycle. 
ii. Lack of data integration has been identified as leading to cost and risk 
increases due to use of non-authoritative/out-of-date data, 
miscommunication of data, and missing data. With this approach, use of 
non-authoritative copies of data is minimized through automated data 
aggregation. Consequently, rates of engineering data discrepancies are 
also reduced whenever automated data aggregation is used. User 
communities can manage specific data in tools explicitly designed for the 
management of that data and can also implement specific processes that 
integrate data directly from the authoritative sources into reports and other 
formats.
B. Automated Data Audits
i. Performing automated audits using information systems is a proven 
approach that has high utility and relatively low cost. 
ii. In the engineering realm, data audits can be performed daily or weekly to 
help drive convergence in design, and can serve to ensure the integrity of 
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
172 of 217
the data that is used in baseline versions of a multitude of engineering 
artifacts. This can be done at the elemental level with a single piece of 
data, or at the composite level with multiple pieces of data.
d. Data Interoperability Formats:
(1) Data interoperability refers not only to CAD data but also to non-CAD data used 
in innovation and preliminary designs and other pre-CAD domains (e.g.
requirements analysis). All formats need attention and are considered part of 
digitalization. All data interoperability should follow standards where applicable 
(e.g. STEP, XML): 
A. Requirements interoperability should focus on STEP AP 242, 239, 233 in ISO 
10303 and also follow Regulated Qualifications Framework (RQF) or 
Requirements Interchange Format (RIF) standards.
B. CAD data interoperability formats should be chosen based on the need for 
interoperability or reuse after delivery.
(2) Currently, MCAD data formats may be selected from Table 6. In Table 8, Format 
Maturity Levels, a maturity level is assigned to each data format by which the 
dynamics of each can be judged against intended utilization. (Refer to NIMARPT-004.) However, users should assess the current trend in technology from 
other sources prior to selecting data interoperability formats.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
173 of 217
Table 8—Format Maturity Levels
Note: Intended Utilization Options
(3) To build off the format and maturity levels of available technologies, the 
following guidelines are provided for when to apply the format:
A. Level 1 (Paper): Documents delivered on the printed page.
ePaper
XML Data 
Objects
<mx:XMLList 
id="myXMLList">
 <child 
name="{textInput1.
text}"/>
 <child 
name="{textInput2.
text}"/>
PDF
EXTL 
Application/ 
Database
Project-based Transitional Enterprise-based
Traditional 
Paper
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
174 of 217
Specify when reuse and/or life-cycle maintenance of materials is not desired. 
Note: This approach is not recommended nor supported under MBE.
B. Level 2 (Formatted Documents)16 17: 
Documents delivered electronically in a customer-approved, contractor format 
but containing no attached electronic semantic meaning. This approach is not 
recommended nor supported under MBE. Specify when standard digital data 
can be delivered as electronic paper in a digital form. Electronic paper should 
include metadata tags, including, but not limited to, data type, system, title, 
and last modified to assist with document identification, storage, indexing, 
and key word tagging down to a minimum of three levels of subsections as 
defined by the program/project. Reuse and/or life-cycle maintenance of 
materials is not desired.
C. Level 3 (Standard XML Data Descriptions for Digital Data in NASA Standard 
Format): 
For standard XML digital data descriptions to be usable, a common data 
dictionary has to be referenced by all producers and consumers of digital data 
as defined by NASA’s common data dictionary. If a NASA standard is not 
applicable, digital data has to reference a common data dictionary as defined 
by the contractor. A catalog of XML schema data descriptions should exist 
prior to the delivery of contractor data to NASA. Specify when:
i. The potential for reuse of data exists.
ii. A need exists for interoperability of data described by XML schemas 
that move between/among NASA Centers and programs/projects with 
contractors, industry, partners, academia, services, program/project 
life-cycle states, and/or platforms. 
iii. Tagging data according to law, requirements, and classification is 
needed at the data object level.
D. Level 4 (Digital Data from a Source Repository to a Target Repository in a 
Program/Project-specified Format): 
 
16 Zip is a file format used for data compression and archiving. A zip file contains one or more files that have been 
compressed, to reduce file size, or stored as is. The zip file format permits a number of compression algorithms. Zip 
files generally use the file extensions ".zip" or ".ZIP.”
17 Enterprise Content Management (ECM) consists of strategies, methods, and tools used to capture, manage, store, 
preserve, and deliver content and documents related to organizational processes.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
175 of 217
Digital data extraction from a source data repository in supplier format, data 
transformation into a target format, and data loading into a target data 
repository. Specify when:
i. The potential for reuse of data exists.
ii. A need exists for interoperability of standardized content 
between/among NASA Centers and programs/projects with 
contractors, industry, partners, academia, services, program/project 
life-cycle states, and/or platforms.
iii. A content interoperability management system that conforms to an 
existing or planned set of NASA information systems and data 
capabilities that can receive the content.
iv. A need exists for interoperability of database repositories 
between/among NASA Centers and programs/projects with 
contractors, industry, partners, academia, services, program/project 
life-cycle states, and/or platforms.
v. A database-to-database integration approach exists.
vi. Tagging data according to law, policy, or classification is needed at the 
data object level.
(4) Minimizing customization and adapting external standards can reduce the 
complexity and would facilitate future upgrades and the exchange of data with 
external parties. Because process definition is integral to MBE, the native tool 
flexibility means that even a no-customization solution can still proliferate 
complexity and inhibit data sharing.
(5) Consolidation of instances of PDM can reduce the visible number of systems 
while doing little to achieve the critical goals of improved bi-directional sharing 
of data internally and externally as stated below: 
A. For instance, creation of multiple partitions within a single installation in 
which each partition owner can reproduce their own processes, data structures, 
and configuration settings will reduce the number of visible “systems” but not 
guarantee data exchange.
B. Process terms include the definition of the data objects, the flow steps, the 
descriptors, user roles, and the decision rules.
C. The processes are implemented by configuring elements into flows, so 
agreement on the base elements is needed to facilitate data sharing and reduce 
maintenance costs.
D. The depth of agreement on the base elements and flow configuration is the 
primary mechanism by which interoperability can be achieved. 
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
176 of 217
(6) In lieu of globally defined and rigid process definitions that have to accommodate 
all types of work, the core definition of critical processes related to 
interoperability should be pursued. By looking for commonality around 
collaboration and data sharing, over-specification is avoided and adaptability is 
encouraged. 
(7) Managing product design and facilitating its use also depends on the design data 
itself being compliant with a set of practices applied outside the tool. Most 
notably, the configuration, accuracy, identification, and other settings enacted by 
engineers within the same tool will affect the ability and effort required to share 
their data with each other; a perfect MBE solution cannot overcome 
incompatibility choices made at the source. The list of processes that need to be 
discovered and assessed for interoperability begin outside the MBE tool and 
extend into manufacturing, procurement, logistics, and mission operations 
application and systems interfaces. 
(8) A program/project manager and the delegated Technical Authority need to 
address this list of questions that drives process interoperability:
A. How will peer engineers and designers be allowed to share data in support of 
detailed design?
B. What is sufficient and necessary to define for a specific need (e.g. design, 
verification, manufacturing):
i. Part (hardware and software).
ii. Assembly or subsystem.
iii. Systems or products.
C. How are parts identified and named to avoid conflict, confusion, and reduce 
data redundancy?
D. What is the definition of models for a specific purpose (e.g. systems design, 
part design, envelope, interface checking, thermal and structural analysis, 
integration, and shrink-wrap)? 
E. How are the alternate versions of models related and managed, and what is 
required to ensure traceability and sharing?
F. What practices and resources reduce the effort required to find, use, and 
integrate approved part definitions, including common hardware?
G. What state labels, descriptors, and process steps identify the allowed uses, 
authorized user, and change status of engineering design data during its life 
cycle (e.g. engineering release, change control, and configuration definition)?
H. What defines a product structure for a given use/audience/life-cycle state, and 
how is that product structure produced and approved?
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
177 of 217
APPENDIX H
ACRONYMS, ABBREVIATIONS, AND DEFINITIONS
H.1 Purpose
This Appendix provides a listing of acronyms, abbreviations, and definitions related to this 
NASA Technical Handbook.
H.2 Acronyms and Abbreviations
A&E Architect and Engineering
ABCL as-built configuration list
AD audit documentation
ADP acceptance data package
AP application protocol
API application programming interface
ASE airborne support equipment
ASOT authoritative source of truth
ASSY assembly
ATBD algorithm theoretical basic document
ATP acceptance test procedure
BOM bill of material
CAD computer-aided design
CAE computer-aided engineering
CAGE Commercial and Government Entity
CAM computer-aided manufacturing
CCB Configuration Control Board
CD compact disc
CDR Critical Design Review
CDRL Contractual Deliverable Items List
cg center of gravity
CDM configuration and data management
CDMP Configuration and Data Management Plan
CDMPA Configuration and Data Management Process Audit
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
CGM Computer graphics metafile
CI configuration item
CID cable interconnect diagram
CIO Chief Information Officer
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
178 of 217
CMO Configuration Management Organization
COLLADA COLLAborative Design Activity
COQ certification of qualification
CORBA common object request broker architecture
COTS commercial off the shelf
CPU central processing unit
CR change request
CS computer software
CSA Configuration Status Accounting
CSCI computer software configuration item
CSD computer software documentation
CSV comma-separated value
CWM common warehouse metamodel
D Dimensional
DA Data Architecture
DAL data accession list
DCE digital collaborative environment
DDT&E design, development, test, and evaluation
DEE Digital engineering environment
DFAR Defense FAR
Di dimensional intelligent
DM Data Manager
DMO Data Management Office
DMU digital mock-up
DoD/DD Department of Defense
DPD Data Procurement Document
DR discrepancy report
DRD Data Requirements Description
DRL Data Requirements List
DRM Data Requirements Manager
DVD digital versatile disc
DW data warehouse
DXF drawing exchange format
EBOM engineering bills of material
ECAD electrical computer-aided design
ECM Enterprise Content Management
ECP engineering change proposal
EEE electronic, electrical, and electromechanical
EGSE electrical ground support equipment
EIA Electronic Industries Alliance
EMDAL Engineering models, drawings, and associated lists
EO engineering order
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
179 of 217
ePaper electronic paper
ESB Enterprise service bus
ETL Extraction-Transformation-Loading (also EXTL)
EXTL Extraction-Transformation-Loading (also ETL)
FAR Federal Acquisition Regulation
FCA functional configuration audit
FEA finite element analysis
FEM finite element method
FFF form, fit, and function
FFRDC Federally Funded Research and Development Center
FIPS Federal Information Processing Standard
FMEA failure mode effects analysis
FPGA field programmable gate array
FTP file transfer protocol
GD&T geometric dimensioning and tolerancing
GDRM Global Drawing Requirements Manual
GIF graphics interchange format
GN&C guidance, navigation, and control
GOTS Government off-the-shelf
GPR Government purpose right
GPU graphics processing unit
GSE ground support equipment
GSMAF Goddard Space Mission Architecture Framework
HDBK handbook
HR hazard report
HWCI hardware configuration item
IAE index of ancillary equipment
ICD interface control document
ICWG Interface Control Working Group
IDL indentured drawing list
IDP interface detail product
IEC International Electro-technical Commission
IEEE Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
IGES Initial Graphics Exchange Specification
INCOSE International Council on Systems Engineering
IOC index of components
IOCD index of configuration documentation
IOTM index of technical manuals
IP Internet protocol
IPL indentured parts list
IS information systems
ISA information systems architecture
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
180 of 217
ISO International Organization for Standardization
ISP integrated support plan
ISS International Space Station
ISSA Information Support System Architecture
IT information technology
ITAR International Traffic in Arms Regulations
IUID item unique identification
JPEG/JPG Joint Photographic Experts Group
JPL Jet Propulsion Laboratory
JT Jupiter Tessellation
KDP key decision point
LOTAR Long-term archiving and retrieval
LOX liquid oxygen
LR limited rights
LSI Lead Systems Integrator
LSP Launch Services Program
M&S Modeling and Simulation
MB model based
MBA model-based assurance
MBC model-based compliance
MBD model-based definition
MBe model-based engineering
MBE model-based enterprise
MBI model-based inspection
MBM model-based manufacturing
MBOM manufacturing bill of material
MBSE model-based systems engineering
MCAD mechanical computer-aided design
MDA model-driven architecture
MDE model-driven engineering
MDM master data management
MDSE model-driven software engineering
MEL master equipment list
MIL military
MIUL material identification usage list
MMI maintenance-managed item
MOF Meta Object Facility
MOTS modified off-the-shelf
MOU Memorandum of Understanding
MRB Materials Review Board
MRI master record index
MSFC Marshall Space Flight Center
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
181 of 217
MUA Material Review Board
NA not applicable
NASA National Aeronautics and Space Administration
NDA non-disclosure agreement
NDAF NASA Data Architecture Framework
NFARS/NFS NASA FAR Supplement
NIMA NASA Integrated Model-Centric Architecture
NIST National Institute of Standards and Technology
NPD NASA Policy Directive
NPR NASA Procedural Requirements
NURBS non-uniform rational basis spline
OCIO Office of the Chief Information Officer
OCL object constraint language
OMG Object Management Group
OMIT operation, maintenance, installation, and training
OPR office of primary responsibility
PCA physical configuration audit
PCI product configuration information
PDD product definition data 
PDF portable document format
PDF/A Portable document format - archiveable
PDLM product data and life-cycle management
PDM product data management
PDR Preliminary Design Review
PIC Procurement Information Circular
PLM product life-cycle management
PMI part manufacturing information
PMO Program Management Office
PNG portable network graphics
POP period of performance
PS product structure
PUB Publication
PWS Performance Work Statement
QAP quality assurance provisions
QVT query/view/transformation
RAM random access memory
REST representational state transfer
RFI Request for Information
RFP Request for Proposals
RFQ Request for Quotes
RFV request for variance 
RID review item discrepancy
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
182 of 217
RIF/ReqIF™ Requirement Interchange Format
RM requirements management
RPT report
RQF Regulated Qualifications Framework
RR restricted rights
S&TE support and test equipment
SBIR Small Business Innovative Research
SBU sensitive but unclassified
SDR System Definition Review
SDT specification and drawing tree
SE&I systems engineering and integration
SEMP Systems Engineering Management Plan
SGML standard generalized markup language
SGR Statement of General Requirements
SIE special inspection equipment
SMA Safety and Mission Assurance
SME subject matter expert
SOAP simple object access protocol
SOR system of record
SOW Statement of Work
SP special publication
SPI special packaging instructions
SQL structured query language
SRR System Requirement Review
SSOT single source of truth
SSP Space Shuttle Program
ST special tooling
STD Standard
STEP Standard for the Exchange of Product
SysML™ Systems Modeling Language™
T&I technology and innovation
TBD to be determined
TD technical data
TDLP technical data package list
TDP technical data package
TRL technical readiness level
UID unique identification
UML unified modeling language
UR unlimited rights
URI uniform research identifier
UUID universally unique identifier
V&V verification and validation
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
183 of 217
VCR verification compliance report
VDD version description document
VR variance request
W3C World Wide Web Consortium
WBS work breakdown structure
X3D extensible 3D
XMI XML metadata interchange
XML extensible markup language
XSD XML schema definition
H.3 Definitions
Authoritative Data: Data that have been designated as valid for specific official 
programs/projects. The designated data is controlled by processes. (Source: NPD 7120.4, 
NASA Engineering and Program/Project Management Policy)
Authoritative Source: An application or repository identified as the official source for 
specific authoritative data. 
Computer-Aided Design (CAD): Process of creating engineering designs defined by 
electronically produced multi-dimensional geometry using special software systems, the tools 
used by engineers to create geometric-based design definitions represented in a variety of 
formats, including two-dimensional (2D) drawings, three-dimensional (3D) solid models, 
envelopes, wireframes, and kinematics and time-based models.
Configuration Management (CM): A management discipline applied over a product's 
life cycle to provide visibility into and control changes to performance, functionality, and 
physical characteristics. (Source: NPR 7120.5, NASA Space Flight Program and Project 
Management Requirements) Also, a technical and management process for establishing and 
maintaining consistency of a product’s functional and physical attributes with its requirements, 
design, and operational information throughout its life. (Source: SAE EIA-649, Configuration 
Management Standard)
Contract Data Items List (CDRL): A list of authorized required data requirements for a 
specific procurement that forms part of the contract/agreement. It is comprised of either a 
single or multiple DRDs containing data requirements and delivery information. The CDRL is 
the standard format for identifying potential data requirements in a solicitation and deliverable 
data requirements in a contract. Use of the CDRL in solicitations is required when a contract 
will require delivery of data. CDRLs should be linked directly to Statement of Work (SOW) 
tasks and managed by the Program Management Office (PMO) data manager. Data 
requirements can also be identified in the contract via Special Contract Clauses (e.g., Federal 
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
184 of 217
Acquisition Regulations/NASA Supplements [NFARS]), which define special data provisions 
(such as Rights in Data, Warranty, etc.).
The purpose of the CDRL is to provide a standardized method of clearly and unambiguously 
delineating the Government’s minimum essential data needs. The CDRL groups all of the data 
requirements in a single place rather than having them scattered throughout the solicitation or 
contract. A DRD is the completed document that defines the data required of a 
contractor/Offeror and is included in the CDRL. The DRD is used to specifically define the 
data content, format, and intended use.
Data: The lowest level of abstraction from which information and knowledge are 
derived. Any collection of recorded facts, numbers, or datum of any nature that can be 
communicated, stored, and ultimately processed, using business rules, to form useful 
information. (Source: SAE EIA-649)
• Authoritative source of truth (ASOT) - an entity such as a person, governing body, 
or system that applies expert judgement and rules to proclaim a digital artifact is valid 
and originates from a legitimate source. (Source: OMG.)
a. The ASOT for a digital artifact serves as the primary means of ensuring the 
credibility and coherence of the digital artifact that its creators share with a 
variety of stakeholders. 
b. It gives stakeholders from diverse organizations and distributed locations the 
authorization to access, analyze, and use valid digital artifacts from an 
authoritative source.
c. The owners of digital environments or the community for digital engineering 
ecosystems provides stakeholders with an authoritative source of truth that 
assures confidence in the quality of the digital artifact across disciplines, 
domains, and life-cycle phases.
• Single source of truth (SSOT) 
• Architecture - practices structuring information models and associated data 
schemas such that each data element is mastered (created and/or edited) in only 
one/single location (no duplication of data or documentation)
a. Any/all linkages to a data element (in other locations within the 
relational schema or in external federated databases) are by reference 
only (pushed/pulled data resides in one source and will update 
immediately upon source update),
b. Since all other usages of (locations) the data element merely refer to the 
primary "source of truth" location, updates to that data element in the 
primary location are subsequently propagated through the entire system 
without possibility of a duplicate (non-referenced) value somewhere 
being forgotten.
c. Organizations with more than one information system, wishing to 
implement an SSOT (without modifying all but one master system to 
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
185 of 217
store pointers to other systems for all entities), typically utilize one or 
more of three supporting technologies, namely:
Enterprise service bus (ESB), Master data management (MDM), or Data 
warehouse (DW).
• Authoritative Source of Information/System of Record (SOR)
• A system of record is the authoritative data source for a given data element or 
piece of information.
Data Architecture: Provides an understanding of what information is needed to 
effectively execute the Enterprise's business processes and provides a framework for 
effectively managing the Enterprise's information environment. Note: Data Architecture links 
information behavior (i.e. accessing, using, and sharing data), information management 
processes, and information support staff to other aspects of the Enterprise. (Source: 
NPR 2830.1, NASA Enterprise Architecture Procedures)
Data Life Cycle: The series of states that a data object can take from its creation to its 
retirement or destruction; generally, these states represent maturity levels or indicate suitability 
for, or restrictions on, use. 
Data Management: The process used to:
a. Provide the basis for identifying and controlling all types of digital and electronic 
data.
b. Provide the basis for identifying and controlling data requirements and 
specifications.
c. Responsively and economically acquire, access, and distribute data needed to 
develop, manage, operate, and support system products over their product-line life.
d. Manage and dispose data as records.
e. Analyze data use.
f. Ensure data integrity, fidelity, access, security, and proliferation.
g. Enforce data definition standards (naming, security, revisions, CDM).
h. If any of the technical effort is performed by an external contractor, obtain 
technical data feedback for managing the contracted technical effort.
i. Assess the collection of appropriate technical data and information.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
186 of 217
j. Effectively manage authoritative data that defines, describes, analyzes, and 
characterizes a product life cycle.
k. Ensure consistent, repeatable use of effective MBE processes, best practices, 
interoperability approaches, methodologies, and traceability. (Source: NPR 7123.1)
Data Model: Identifies the data, their attributes, and relationships or associations with 
other data. (Source: Department of Defense Directive 8320.03, Unique Identification (UID) 
Standards for a Net-Centric Department of Defense, March 2007)
Delivery: Applies to the hand-off, which may be physical or virtual in the case of data, 
at initial delivery of an item during development, for collaboration, in support of reviews, at 
the time of acceptance, and for subsequent modifications, maintenance, refurbishment, or any 
other activity that produces new data. 
Digital Data: The level of abstraction from which digital (electronically defined) 
information and knowledge are derived. A collection of recorded facts, numbers, or datum of a 
digitized object that can be defined, annotated, characterized with non-graphical properties and 
definition, communicated, stored, and ultimately processed, using business rules, to form 
useful information. Also, information prepared by electronic means and made available to 
users by electronic data access, interchange, transfer, or on electronic/magnetic media. 
(Source: SAE GEIA-HB-649)
Digital Engineering: Engineering performed in a digital collaborative environment 
which integrates stakeholders providing authoritative sources of data and models seamlessly 
across organizations and disciplines to support life-cycle activities from concept through 
disposal.
Digitization: The conversion of analog information into digital form “or as a verb.” 
The act of scanning or converting paper or other descriptive elements into electronic paper 
such as drawings into machine-readable PDF documents. 
Digitalization: The act of transforming paper-based processes and artifacts into the 
digital and connected world. Unlike digitization, digitalization is the actual “process” of the 
technologically induced changes within these industries. This process has enabled much of the 
phenomena today known as the Internet of Things, Industrial Internet, Industry 4.0, big data, 
machine-to-machine communication, block-chain, cryptocurrencies, etc.
Digital Transformation: The total and overall effect of digitalization. Digitization has 
enabled the process of digitalization, which resulted in stronger opportunities to transform and 
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
187 of 217
change existing business models, socio-economic structures, legal and policy measures, 
organizational patterns, cultural barriers, etc.
End Item: A product to be delivered under contract as an intact unit or to be 
assembled, completed, and made ready for use as a unit. 
Engineering Release: An action whereby configuration information or an item is 
officially made available for its intended use. (Source: SAE EIA-649-2)
Governance Model: The framework—principles and structures—through which the 
Agency manages the mission, roles, and responsibilities. (Source: NPD 1000.0, NASA 
Governance and Strategic Management Handbook)
Mechatronics: A multidisciplinary field of engineering that includes a combination of 
systems engineering, mechanical engineering, electrical engineering, telecommunications 
engineering, control engineering, and computer engineering. As technology advances, the 
subfields of engineering multiply and adapt. Mechatronics' aim is a design process that unifies 
these subfields.
Metadata: Data about data, properties (title, document number, creation date, etc.) 
used to identify or define a data item. (Source: SAE EIA-649)
Model: A description or representation of a system, entity, phenomena, or process. 
(Source: NASA-STD-7009, Standard for Models and Simulations) 
Modeling (verb): The physical activity of creating an abstract or digital object that 
represents a system, entity, phenomena, or process. (Source: NASA-STD-7009, Standard for 
Models and Simulations)
Model Based: An annotated model and its associated data elements that define a 
product, which can be used effectively without a drawing. It describes a technology approach 
where rigorous visual modeling principles and techniques form the technical foundation for an 
engineering or development process to increase its efficiency and productivity. The model is 
the source authority that drives all engineering activities.
Model-Based Engineering Framework: The set of processes that defines and utilizes 
associated information used to manage and execute the entire life cycle of product data from 
its conception, through design, test, qualification, and manufacturing, to service and disposal 
and integrates definition and product development data, processes (elements), tools, and 
business and analytical systems to provide users with a digital product information backbone 
for defining NASA programs/projects.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
188 of 217
Model-Based Engineering Framework System: A combination and interoperability 
connection of systems utilizing information technology applications, user-defined apps, and 
processes that implement the management of digital product and systems data within the 
extended enterprise (inclusive of Center to Center and inclusive of suppliers, partners, and 
primes) across the product life cycle. 
Model-Based Manufacturing (MBM): Defines the desired end target state of the earlier 
defined model based definition. Test and validation for compliance (model-based compliance 
[MBC]) come into play to ensure manufacturing is executing to the proper and correct 
requirements, materials are developed or assembled per the proper specification, and process 
steps for formulation are followed and executed properly.
Model-Based Systems Engineering (MBSE): The formalized application of modeling 
to support system requirements, design, definition, analysis, verification, and validation 
activities beginning in the conceptual design phase and continuing throughout development 
and later life-cycle phases. (Source: International Council on Systems Engineering (INCOSE), 
Systems Engineering Vision 2020, Version 2.03, TP-2004-004-02, September 2007)
Models-Based Approach: An approach to developmental engineering in which the 
design and its associated analyses, specifications, etc., are created, used, and managed as a 
non-document digital data object (or multiple linked objects); different formats exist to support 
different engineering domains, and these divergent needs and data differences impact 
interoperability, data integrity, and engineering data management.
Model-Driven Software Engineering (MDSE): A software development methodology 
that focuses on creating and exploiting domain models, which are conceptual models of all the 
topics related to a specific problem. Hence, it highlights and aims abstract representations of 
the knowledge and activities that govern a particular application domain, rather than the 
computing (i.e. algorithmic) concepts.
Product: A part of a system consisting of end products that perform operational 
functions and enabling products that perform life-cycle services related to the end product or a 
result of the technical efforts in the form of a work product (e.g. plan, baseline, or test result). 
(Source: NPR 7123.1) Also, the following:
a. Hardware, e.g. engine mechanical part.
b. Software, e.g. computer program or model.
c. Processed materials, e.g. a lubricant.
d. Facilities, e.g. a laboratory or machine shop.
(Source: SAE EIA-649-2) 
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
189 of 217
Product Breakdown Structure: A hierarchical view of the relationship of products and 
component products. (Source: NPD 7120.4, NASA Engineering and Program/Project 
Management Policy)
Product Data and Life-Cycle Management (PDLM): NASA’s strategic business 
approach that consists of both PDM (product data management) and PLM (product life-cycle 
management). PDLM applies not only to a mechanism to store and retrieve data but also to 
manage the data over the product development life cycle. PDLM leverages a consistent set of 
business solutions in support of the collaborative creation, management, dissemination, and 
use of product definition data/information across the extended enterprise from concept to end 
of life. 
Product Data Management (PDM): The framework that enables organizations to 
manage and control engineering and technical information, specifically data surrounding the 
product's design, definition, and related engineering, manufacturing, and logistics processes 
and is a key element of PLM. Note: From the product perspective, PDM organizes data 
required for design evolution, tracks versions and configurations of evolving design concepts, 
and manages archived data and other product-specific information. PDM tools provide access 
to product structures and other engineering data such as requirements, as-built data, and 
safety and mission assurance data. From the process perspective, PDM systems offer the 
capability to orchestrate controlled procedural events such as design reviews, approvals, 
product releases, and configuration audits. (Source: NPD 7120.4)
Product Definition Data (PDD): Data that defines the product’s requirements, 
documents the product attributes, and is the authoritative source for configuration management 
of the product. (Source: Adapted from SAE EIA-649)
Product Life Cycle: A series of states that generally defines the maturity level of a 
product and correlates with specific uses or users. Commonly, each state is represented by an 
agreed-to collection of information that identifies and establishes the attributes of a product at 
a point in time and that serves as the basis for defining change. Note: A product's life cycle 
begins with a concept and ends with disposal.
Product Life-Cycle Management (PLM): A strategic business approach that applies a 
consistent set of business solutions in support of the collaborative creation, management, 
dissemination, and use of product definition data/information across the extended enterprise 
from concept to end of life. Note: PLM integrates people/organizations, processes, and 
information. In product-dominated endeavors, PLM serves as the information backbone that 
extends outside the enterprise. PLM implementations may be composed of multiple elements, 
including foundation technologies and standards (e.g. Extensible Markup Language (XML)), 
visualization, collaboration, and enterprise application integration), information authoring 
tools (e.g. mechanical computer-aided design, electrical computer-aided design, and technical 
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
190 of 217
publishing), core functions (e.g. data vaults, document and content management, workflow, 
and program/project management), functional applications (e.g. CDM), and business solutions 
built on the other elements. (Source: NPD 7120.4)
Simulation: The imitation of the characteristics of a system, entity, phenomena, or 
process using a computational model. (Source: NASA-STD-7009)
Software: (1) All or part of the programs, procedures, rules, and associated 
information of an information processing system; or (2) computer programs, procedures, and 
possibly associated information and data pertaining to the operation of a computer system. 
Note: The definition of software is independent of the media on which the software is stored or 
the device in which the software executes (such as a programmable logic device). (Source: 
SAE EIA-649-2) Also, computer programs, procedures, scripts, rules, and associated 
documentation and data pertaining to the development and operation of a computer system. 
This definition applies to software developed by NASA, software developed for NASA, COTS 
software, Government-off-the-shelf (GOTS) software, modified-off-the-shelf (MOTS) 
software, reused software, auto-generated code, embedded software, the software executed on 
processors embedded in Programmable Logic Devices (see NASA-HDBK-4008), and opensource software components. Note 1: Only for purposes of the NASA Software Release 
program, the term software, as redefined in NPR 2210.1, Release of NASA Software, does not 
include computer databases or software documentation. Note 2: Definitions for the terms 
COTS, GOTS, heritage software, MOTS, legacy software, software reuse, and classes of 
software are provided in NPR 7150.2. (Source: NPD 7120.4)
Virtual Database: A container for components used to integrate data from multiple 
data sources so that they can be accessed in an integrated manner through a single, uniform 
application programming interface (API). It contains models, which define the structural 
characteristics of data sources, views, and Web services.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
191 of 217
APPENDIX I
RATIONALE AND INTRODUCTION TO THE DIGITAL 
ENGINEERING ENVIRONMENT
I.1 RATIONALE
The creation, usage, and management of digital product-related data used in cradle-to-grave life 
cycles are daily events at NASA. The scale and complexity of the data now required for model 
and program definition continues to grow not only for product definition but also with regard to 
the communication of “smart and intelligent” digital data to and from all program participants. 
NASA programs and projects are beginning to use the digital models as the authoritative 
understanding of the system, avoiding expensive testing which is no longer a single site activity 
but now meaning collaborative work.
In light of the current climate of change, whereas NASA prime contractors and partners are 
taking a more active role as “System Integrators,” NASA has identified the need to alter the 
current acquisition process to that as a model-based acquisition process—Center-to-Center and 
Center-to-commercial supplier product development, collaboration, and interoperability 
processes to remain relevant by leveraging model-based techniques, benefits, and collaborative 
technologies. Many current revisions of NASA’s Technical Handbooks, although full of sound 
engineering principles, do not address today’s digital environment or address MBE practices.
It is incumbent on NASA to develop and adopt new agile approaches achieving greater 
performance and affordability to meet the Agency’s current and future challenges. Without 
sustained efforts funded with predictable investment to restore agile effectiveness and 
modernization, we will rapidly lose our technological advantages, resulting in an organization 
that has legacy methods and systems irrelevant to the challenges confronting us. To meet the 
Agency’s goals and objectives, we must modernize our thinking and practices to develop 
systems and processes that prioritize the speed of development and delivery enabling our 
success.
The integration of the information in these models is a challenge, and the size of the data sets 
produced by some engineering models strains the limits of some data management and data 
transfer systems. New programs need to consider digital elements, including the authoritative 
data source repository, shared access, and storage and retrieval mechanisms not only internal to 
NASA but also to primes/partners to respond in meeting these challenges. Therefore, the need to 
address the acquisition framework must be updated to reflect the model-based environment that 
depicts NASA.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
192 of 217
I.2 INTRODUCTION
NASA must promote our use of various digital representations of systems and components and 
the use of digital artifacts as a technical means of communication across the diverse set of 
stakeholders. The MBE strategy addresses a range of disciplines involved with the acquisition 
and procurement of systems; and it encourages innovation in the way we design, build, test, 
deploy, operate, maintain, and sustain our systems and how we train and shape our workforces to 
use these practices.
The way that we do this is by incorporating the use of digital computing, analytical capabilities, 
and new technologies to conduct engineering in more integrated virtual environments increasing 
customer and vendor engagement, improving collaboration response timelines, fostering 
technology infusion, reducing documentation cost, and positively affecting operational and 
sustainment affordability. These comprehensive engineering environments will enable NASA 
internally and with its industry partners to evolve designs at the conceptual phase, reducing the 
need for expensive physical mock-ups, premature design freezing, and physical development 
testing.
This NASA Technical Handbook describes the digital engineering vision to modernize how the 
Agency designs, develops, delivers, operates, and sustains systems. NASA defines digital 
engineering as an integrated digital approach that uses authoritative sources of system data and 
models as a continuum across organizations and disciplines to support life-cycle activities from 
concept through disposal and the beginnings of the "what" that are necessary to foster the use of 
digital engineering practices. This NASA Technical Handbook intends to lay out the foundation 
for those implementing the practices who must further develop their "how"—the implementation 
steps necessary to apply digital engineering in each of their enterprises and specific 
programs/projects. The Centers and programs/projects should develop corresponding digital 
engineering implementation plans to ensure the Agency advances this timely and imperative 
effort. OCE will develop new and/or update existing Agency policies that support realization of 
digital engineering goals (e.g. data rights, intellectual property), develop standard contract 
language for RFPs that encourages model-centric interaction between industry and government, 
and support standards development to support digital engineering goals.
While this NASA Technical Handbook may not cover all aspects and topics of MBE, references 
are provided to the appropriate sources for deeper study and information.
This NASA Technical Handbook addresses:
• A high-level overview of MBE that serves as the core domain and environment from 
which subsequent model-based activities (such as manufacturing, acquisition, etc.) will 
be based upon.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
193 of 217
• General guidance to adapt the engineering methods needed to collaborate internally as 
well as externally to implement model-based product/data acquisition requirements in 
accordance with NPR 7120.5.
• Architectural processes and impacts when determining the need to implement a modelbased environment and intending to utilize topics and methods such as MBSE, MBE, 
MBM, and PDLM.
• Reference and inclusion of current NASA acquisition (contractual language, e.g.
SOW/PWS clauses, DRDs, etc.) that will be updated or new ones created to provide a 
foundation framework that supports a collaborative MBE approach.
 Model interoperability standards within NASA development domains and integration 
from Center to Center and Center to commercial suppliers.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
194 of 217
APPENDIX J
MODEL-BASED ENGINEERING (MBE) PLAN
J.1 PURPOSE
The purpose of an MBE Plan is to document agreement among the program manager and various 
providers of MBE services on how the identified MBE capabilities will be provided. For singleproject or tightly coupled programs (as defined in NPR 7120.5), a single program-wide Plan 
should be produced. A variety of program and project documents, project data, and process 
requirements will need to be synchronized with this Plan and with the provision of IT-related 
capabilities, services, and infrastructure.
J.2 MBE PLAN DEVELOPMENT GUIDELINES
Table 9, MBE Plan Development Guidelines, is a recommended guideline for the development 
of the MBE framework and element information that is to be captured in the MBE Plan.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
195 of 217
Table 9—MBE Plan Development Guidelines
Formulation
Implementation
MBE
Elements
Pre-Phase 
A
Concept 
Studies
Phase A
Concept & 
Technology 
Development
Phase B
Prelim 
Design & 
Technology 
Completion 
Phase C
Final 
Design & 
Fabrication
Phase D
Sys 
Assembly, 
Integration 
& Test, 
Launch & 
Checkout
Phase E
Operation 
& 
Sustainment
Phase 
F
Closeout
KDP 0 KDP I KDP II KDP III KDP IV KDP V KDP 
VI
Security 
Architecture
Preliminary Preliminary Baseline Update Update Update
Information 
Support 
System 
Architecture
Preliminary Preliminary Baseline Update Update Update
Data 
Architecture
Preliminary Preliminary Baseline Update Update Update
Process 
Architecture
Preliminary Preliminary Baseline Update Update Update
Requirements 
Management
Preliminary Baseline Update Update
Configuration 
Management
* Baseline Update Update Update Update Update
Risk 
Management
* Preliminary Baseline Update Update Update
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
196 of 217
Formulation
Implementation
MBE
Elements
Pre-Phase A
Concept Studies
Phase A
Concept & 
Technology 
Development
Phase B
Prelim Design & 
Technology 
Completion 
Phase C
Final 
Design & 
Fabricatio
n
Phase 
D Sys 
Assembly
, Int 
&Test, 
Launch 
& 
Checkout
Phase 
E
Operatio
n & 
Sustainm
ent
Phase 
F
Closeout
KDP 0 KDP I KDP II KDP III KDP 
IV KDP V KDP 
VI
Product Data 
Management
* Preliminary Baseline Update Update Update Update
Parts 
Management
* * Preliminary Baseline Update Update Update
CAD Data 
Management
* Preliminary Baseline Update Update Update
Product 
Structure (Bill 
of Material)
* Preliminary Preliminary Baseline Update Update
Models-Based 
Design, 
including 
Models and 
Simulations
Preliminary Preliminary Baseline Update Update Update
Digital Data 
Standards and 
Contract 
Language
Preliminary Preliminary Baseline Update Update
Interoperability and 
Sustainability
Preliminary Preliminary Baseline Update Update Update
*These items are to be addressed in the MBE Plan but are expected to be an in-work or to-bedetermined state with planned resolution.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
197 of 217
J.3 MBE PLAN DEVELOPMENT
MBE Plans reflect the requirements for specific MBE capabilities to support the specific
program/project’s scope, document the choices among alternative delivery mechanisms and 
providers, and discuss in detail reliance on IT infrastructure and services. An MBE Plan defines 
the scope of each Center's responsibilities, the implementation approach, the environment in 
which the program and its projects' MBE solution(s) operates, and timing for implementation of 
the MBE solution and associated processes, data, elements, attributes, and formats. The content 
of an MBE Plan is affected by both the program/project’s phasing and by current and planned 
changes to the IT used to implement MBE (e.g. updates and capabilities committed to by MBE 
tool providers). The Plan should be treated as a formally controlled program document.
Concurrence with the Plan is noted by signatures by the program manager, the Mission 
Directorate Associate Administrator, and providers of MBE capabilities such as Center Directors 
and the Mission Directorates. Project managers for tightly coupled programs are required to sign 
the Plan. The Center Directors' concurrence with an MBE Plan documents their commitment to 
provide required Center resources to support the program/project as articulated in the MBE Plan.
The Plan needs to be updated annually or at a major KDP. In the case of product life cycle, the 
Plan needs to be updated through KDP F (close out/archival of data). At KDP C, the 
programs/projects are beginning to understand the data roadmap (Architecture) and interdependencies between the suppliers and NASA.
Elements of a Plan are described as follows:
a. Title page—Document number, document title, release state, and release date.
b. Revision and history—Revision level, change number, description, and release 
date.
c. Signature page.
d. Table of Contents.
e. Preface.
(1) P.1 Purpose of document.
(2) P.2 Applicability and scope.
(3) P.3 Change authority.
(4) P.4 Applicable and reference documents.
f. Body of the document (see Table 10.)
Table 10, MBE Plan Section Development, lists the MBE Plan sections, identifies the MBE 
contributors, and lists the agreements that should be reached for each MBE area, followed by 
detailed descriptions of data to include in each section. All sections of the MBE Plan are 
required. If an extensive discussion is required, the section content may be captured in detail in a
stand-alone document referenced appropriately and summarized in the section. If the material 
has been covered in another approved programmatic document, the source document and the 
appropriate sections, paragraphs, or pages should be indicated. If a section is not applicable due 
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
198 of 217
to the nature of the program or project, include the phrase "Not applicable" in that section and 
provide the rationale. Use section 2.2 to indicate waivers or deviations for compliance with the 
specific requirements of this NPR and identify the source authority documents. 
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does not meet the criteria for control under the 
International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export 
Control Office, (321) 867-9209.
199 of 217
Table 10—MBE Plan Section Development
Section 
No. MBE Plan Section Responsibility/Competency Action
1.0 PROGRAM/PROJECT 
OVERVIEW1
Program/Project Management; 
Center(s) Management;
Center(s) CIO;
Center(s) Engineering Department
Contributors agree on the stated 
performance objectives for the 
Program/Project MBE.
1.1 Introduction Briefly describe the goals of the program and the 
organizational structure of the program, its projects, 
and project elements. Also, provide a context 
diagram identifying the program and relationships to 
each project and element, and identify 
program/project documents that will aid readers in 
understanding the scope, goals, and schedules of the 
content of this Plan.
1.2 Objectives State the specific objectives and high-level 
performance goals levied on the program and its 
projects for MBE.
1.3 Solution Summary Summarize the content of this Plan: which specific 
solutions will be used by which program or project 
elements and for what MBE functions, clarifying use 
by product life cycle and user community, and 
identifying approximate maturity levels. If needed 
beyond the content in the body of this Plan, refer to 
associated documents that describe details of the 
solution elements.
1.4 Assumptions, Limitations, and 
Constraints
List any assumptions affecting this solution such as 
upgrades, software licenses, access control, network 
services, contract provisions/award, or other similar 
matters. If this Plan addresses a subset of all the 
requirements expected for MBE support through the 
life of a program or project, indicate that scope.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does not meet the criteria for control under the 
International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export 
Control Office, (321) 867-9209.
200 of 217
Section 
No. MBE Plan Section Responsibility/Competency Action
1.5 Responsible Organizations, 
Governance, and Plan Update 
Timing
Define responsible organizations and their roles. For 
example, depending on the scope of the 
program/project, this responsibility may be assigned 
to a responsible party within program planning and 
control, or there may be a separate organization such 
as an information systems office. Identify the 
governing mechanisms (including processes, 
boards/panels) through which service capability 
requests and other decisions related to the 
requirements in this Plan or their implementation 
will be approved. Clarify the scale or scope of 
requests or changes that require formal approval and 
potentially lead to an update of this Plan. Identify the 
program or project document describing the change 
control process for this Plan. Address timing of the 
preliminary release, baseline, and updates to the 
program MBE Plan. This timing should recognize 
that the maturity of the Plan is affected by both the 
program's phasing and by current and planned 
changes to the information technology used to 
implement MBE (e.g. updates and capabilities 
committed to by MBE tool providers).
2.0 PROGRAM/PROJECT MBE
REQUIREMENTS 
TRACEABILITY
MBE Program/Project Manager and 
Delegated Technical Authority(s)
Requirement Traceability Matrix identifies 
compliance that the MBE System meets the 
requirements in the contract DRD.
2.1 Requirements Traceability Matrix Identify the specific paragraphs section 4.0, MBE 
Implementation Details, in this table that address 
compliance with the guidance in Table 9, Data 
Architecture. For any Data Architecture guidelines
that cannot be mapped to an implementation plan 
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does not meet the criteria for control under the 
International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export 
Control Office, (321) 867-9209.
201 of 217
Section 
No. MBE Plan Section Responsibility/Competency Action
detail in section 4.0, describe whether they do not 
apply or are to be achieved through future work. 
Identify the specific paragraphs in section 4.0 that 
address compliance with the guidance in Table 9, 
Process Architecture. For any Table 9 Process 
Architecture guidelines that cannot be mapped to an 
implementation plan detail in section 4.0, describe 
whether they do not apply or are to be achieved 
through future work.
2.2 “Do-Not-Apply” Justifications Identify deviations and waivers to the NASA 
directive requirements and the source authority for 
that identified. Justify the exclusion of a requirement 
from any NASA directive. Justify the exclusion of 
any guidance from Process Architecture in Table 9.
2.3 Future Work Discussion Indicate activities or decisions that are in work or not 
yet under way at the time this Plan is approved but 
that will affect the MBE Plan. A future work item 
here does not substitute for an update to this Plan but 
does allow affected parties to be aware of upcoming 
issues. Discuss the rationale and nature of the future 
work related to Data Architecture in Table 9. Discuss 
the rationale and nature of the future work related to 
Process Architecture in Table 9.
3.0 MBE STRATEGY MBE Program/Project Manager and 
Delegated Technical Authority(ies)
Work with engineering and stakeholders to 
define MBE needs. Determine data 
exchange between disparate MBEs (if 
needed) and determine if gap analysis to 
resolve issues is needed.
3.1 MBE Strategy Describe the overarching strategy to be used by this 
program and associated projects to meet the goals of 
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does not meet the criteria for control under the 
International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export 
Control Office, (321) 867-9209.
202 of 217
Section 
No. MBE Plan Section Responsibility/Competency Action
NASA directives. Describe how the strategy affects 
the adoption and deployment of MBE concepts and 
practices. Identify Center and Agency IT initiatives 
such as network updates, program-specific IT 
solutions, and MBE consolidation, and discuss how 
the MBE strategy aligns with these initiatives.
3.2 Product Data Management
Approach
Discuss how product data and product definition will 
be managed for the program and projects covered 
under this Plan. Identify dependencies and barriers 
that must be addressed for full implementation of 
product data management for this program and its 
projects.
3.3 Product Life-Cycle Management
Approach
Discuss how product life-cycle management will be 
conducted for the program and projects covered 
under this Plan. Identify dependencies and barriers 
that must be addressed for full implementation of 
product life-cycle management for this program and 
its projects.
4.0 MBE IMPLEMENTATION 
DETAILS
MBE Process Lead Program/project and Center organizations 
review, modify, and determine if gap 
analysis is needed for existing Center 
processes for use by the program/project
4.1 Processes Process Identification:
Describe processes to be supported in MBE solutions 
at involved Centers or sites and the projects/elements 
that will be using those processes. Refer to relevant 
documents that describe desktop instructions and 
associated tools for the implementation of work 
processes. 
Functional Support:
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does not meet the criteria for control under the 
International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export 
Control Office, (321) 867-9209.
203 of 217
Section 
No. MBE Plan Section Responsibility/Competency Action
Define specific process support and its linkage to 
automated MBE solutions for engineering change 
control and release management, data management, 
configuration management, and program/project 
needs for decision support, reviews, design and 
systems engineering, and operations and sustaining 
tasks. 
Monitoring and Performance Metrics:
Discuss the management tools available to monitor 
process performance and issues such as time in 
queue, mean flow time for reviews, release rates, 
average number of changes in process, and number 
of rejected submissions. 
Data Integrity Processes:
Identify key PDD-related processes associated with 
ensuring integrity of data and with ensuring 
authoritative data are properly and efficiently 
managed. 
Data Exchange Processes:
Identify data exchange processes, discuss the timing 
and nature of their use and involved users, and the 
state of process implementation or maturity. Identify 
associated pre- and post-processing for PDD 
associated with data exchanges (e.g. from design to 
assembly) and the parties responsible for such 
processing. Identify cases where standard processes 
are not yet in place or where exceptions have been 
made and explain the reasoning for any exceptions.
4.2 User Communities MBE Program/Project Manager and 
Delegated Technical Authority(ies)
Determines the users and their locations of 
the MBE system(s).
Identify the user communities, their physical 
location, their program/project assignments, and their 
primary responsibilities.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does not meet the criteria for control under the 
International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export 
Control Office, (321) 867-9209.
204 of 217
Section 
No. MBE Plan Section Responsibility/Competency Action
4.3 MBE Tools MBE Tool Implementation Lead Works with Center CIO to identify existing 
MBE system/tools and with program/project 
to determine if current tools will satisfy 
program/project needs.
Identify the MBE tools and specific applications 
within those tools to be used and the NASA suppliers 
of those tools. Map these tools to the user 
communities defined in 4.2 of this table.
4.4 Process Mapping MBE Process Lead Identifies functional organizational 
processes that are to be used by the 
program/project and determines if gap 
analysis is needed. Also, identifies the 
interfaces between related processes (e.g. 
program/project CDM to Center CDM).
Map the processes from section 4.1 to the user 
communities defined in section 4.2 in this table. Map 
the processes from section 4.1 to the tool in section 
4.3 in this table. If relevant processes are defined in 
other documents, provide the document numbers, 
document titles, and locations of these documents.
4.5 Data Architecture MBE Program/Project Manager and 
Delegated Technical Authority(ies)
The NASA Chief Engineer provides the 
program/project with its MBE architecture 
document(s) to assure program/project 
MBE needs will be met. MBE
program/project manager and delegated 
Technical Authority(ies) identify data 
relationships between different object types.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does not meet the criteria for control under the 
International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export 
Control Office, (321) 867-9209.
205 of 217
Section 
No. MBE Plan Section Responsibility/Competency Action
If Data Architecture is addressed in stand-alone 
program or project documents, identify those 
documents here, including the status of such 
documents and future plans regarding their content 
and applicability. Depending upon the scale and 
scope of the program and its projects, not all aspects 
of Data Architecture need to be addressed 
independently; summarize relevant content from 
other program materials as it relates to the Data 
Architecture for product life cycle and PDD. Identify 
Data Architecture requirements being imposed upon 
the MBE solution elements to support 
interoperability, data exchange, metadata, and work 
practices.
4.6 Product Breakdown Structure 
(highest level representation of 
products used to develop WBS)
MBE Process Lead Determines program/project product 
breakdown structure needs; determines if 
current architecture will meet needs.
Explain how the various levels of product breakdown 
structure(s) for the system end products, their 
subsystems, and the supporting or enabling products 
will be represented and how in-house and contractor 
data will be integrated into the different product 
breakdown structures (or bills of materials) needed 
across the program life cycle. Summarize how 
product breakdown structures (or bills of materials) 
will be used in the program and its projects. Discuss 
how the MBE implementation approach described in 
this NASA Technical Handbook will support 
multiple product breakdown structures being 
available simultaneously across product life cycles 
and program/project milestones. Discuss how 
software and hardware elements of product 
breakdown structure will be linked in support of 
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does not meet the criteria for control under the 
International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export 
Control Office, (321) 867-9209.
206 of 217
Section 
No. MBE Plan Section Responsibility/Competency Action
program/project needs and the effect of those 
requirements on this solution.
4.7 Specialized Data Type Process MBE Process Lead Identifies the MBE data objects and 
associated attributes needed to support the 
programs/projects. Determines what the 
data interoperability requirements are.
Document intentions regarding when to use 
specialized data types such as 3D CAD, 2D CAD, 
models, simulations, or specialized design tools (e.g.
to conduct simulations of product performance, 
control design definition for manufacturing, for 
acceptance check on physical hardware, for 
visualization and training, and for engineering 
analysis and modeling). Describe which, and for 
what purposes, CAD tools will be used by program 
and project elements, including contractors and 
partners. Discuss how the elements of NASA's MBE
CAD interoperability requirements will be applied 
over the life cycle of the program. Identify additional 
internal or external standards, practices, settings, and 
supporting tools to be used (e.g. for model checking, 
conformance, analysis reuse, and data exchange) and 
identify parties responsible for such determinations. 
Discuss how the elements of NASA-STD-7009, 
Standard for Models and Simulations, will be applied 
to product data management. Identify additional 
internal or external standards, practices, or program 
documents that cover modeling and simulation data 
handling, and identify parties responsible for such 
determinations. Identify the standards to be used for 
part identification. Identify responsible parties and 
processes for addressing conflicts and issues around 
CAD file naming, part identification, and 
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does not meet the criteria for control under the 
International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export 
Control Office, (321) 867-9209.
207 of 217
Section 
No. MBE Plan Section Responsibility/Competency Action
reconciliation of issues emerging from use of 
common hardware CAD files and integration of 
CAD files across Centers, program elements, 
contractors, and partners. Define policies for 
identifying the handling of models, simulations, 
CAD design documents that are proprietary, 
intellectual property, or designated as sensitive but 
unclassified (SBU). Identify the program/project data 
or documents that the CAD producer is to provide in 
addition to the CAD object to assure full PDD such 
as parts lists, materials specifications, or acceptance 
testing specifications and where such material will be 
maintained.
4.8 Specialized Libraries and Part Data MBE Process Lead Determines what types of libraries and part 
objects are required to support the 
program/project. Defines the part and 
document identification schema.
Describe how elements of the MBE solution will be 
used to avoid or reduce the occurrence of duplicate 
or multiple part numbers and designations for an 
identical physical part. Describe how the 
program/project will work with the organizations 
responsible for shared part definition libraries, 
common model and simulation libraries, and CAD 
libraries (whether internal or external to the program) 
to ensure approved practices are followed for such 
matters as use, naming, and substitutes/alternatives.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does not meet the criteria for control under the 
International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export 
Control Office, (321) 867-9209.
208 of 217
Section 
No. MBE Plan Section Responsibility/Competency Action
4.9 Engineering Release, Configuration 
Management, and Change Control 
Processes
MBE Process Lead Works with CM organization to define 
change control process. Defines and 
documents as part of the MBE Plan what 
product data is released, when that product 
data is to be released, the events that 
necessitate product data change, and the 
processes that provide the visibility of the 
product data configuration life cycle for 
internally and externally produced product 
data.
Identify existing (or describe the requirements for 
modifications to) engineering release and deliveryof-items processes to support program/project needs 
and interoperability across Centers, program 
elements, contractors, and partners. Include the 
identified solutions (or requested modifications) to 
provide visibility of the life cycle, maturity, and 
change status of PDD (such as 3D CAD models) and 
other engineering models across the program/project 
life cycle. Identify the program/project-specific 
documents that address engineering release, change 
control, and configuration management and 
summarize their content, including contractor 
configuration management, as required by SAE EIA649-2, NASA Configuration Management 
Requirements for NASA Enterprises.
4.10 Data Management Process MBE Process Lead Identifies the MBE data objects and 
associated attributes needed to support the 
programs/projects.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does not meet the criteria for control under the 
International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export 
Control Office, (321) 867-9209.
209 of 217
Section 
No. MBE Plan Section Responsibility/Competency Action
Identify the program/project-specific documents that 
address product-related data management with 
particular attention to PDD and summarize their 
content. Define reports, analyses, data sets, models, 
simulations, and documents (especially those leading 
up to a design, e.g. stress analyses, thermal, loads, 
dynamics) that will be generated for program 
management, troubleshooting, and problem 
resolution. Define a set of authoritative requirements 
and data that represent the various stages of the 
products (e.g. as designed, as built, as delivered, as
maintained) that will represent the architecture of the 
product at all stages. Describe PDD data delivery 
sources, processes, usage, and access rights, 
including contractor-originated data across the entire 
project life cycle. Identify the source and summarize 
relevant content from the program's records plans as 
required by NPD 1440.6, NASA Records 
Management, and NPR 1441.1, NASA Records 
Retention Schedules, and include contractor records 
content or identify source documents and their 
locations.
4.11 Information Security MBE Program/Project Manager and 
Delegated Technical Authority(ies)
Works with Center CIO to identify 
applicable security plans for applications 
and systems to be used.
Identify party responsible for the IT security plan for 
the applications/systems to be used. Discuss any 
intended revisions to support the specific 
program/project needs, their timing, and status.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does not meet the criteria for control under the 
International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export 
Control Office, (321) 867-9209.
210 of 217
Section 
No. MBE Plan Section Responsibility/Competency Action
APPENDICES
Allows for the inclusion of supporting 
material such as concepts of operation, user 
scenarios, glossaries, and the like.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
211 of 217
APPENDIX K
REFERENCES
K.1 Purpose and/or Scope
This Appendix provides additional guidance available in the references below. 
K.2 References
Reference documents may be accessed at https://standards.nasa.gov or obtained directly from the 
Standards Developing Body or other document distributors. When not available from these 
sources, information for obtaining the document is provided. The latest issuances of cited 
documents apply unless specific versions are designated. The following references are 
recommended for further guidance18:
a. MBSE
NASA Models-Based Systems Engineering Group (The MBSE Community of Practice has 
moved to a new URL: https://nen.nasa.gov/web/mbse)
INCOSE (International Council on Systems Engineering) (www.incose.org)
INCOSE (2007) MBSE Initiative Presentation International Council on Systems Engineering 
(INCOSE), Systems Engineering Vision 2020, Version 2.03, TP-2004-004-02, September 2007.
Requirements Exchange: ReqIF™ Requirement Interchange Format - Object Management 
Group™ standard (http://www.omg.org/spec/ReqIF/)
b. CAD Data Management
ASME Y14.41, Digital Product Definition Data Practices, Engineering Product Definition and 
Related Documentation Practices
ASME Y14.47, Model Organization Practices - Engineering Product Definition
and Related Documentation Practices
PROSTEP AG, White Paper, “3D Formats in the Field of Engineering – A
 
18 If Web links are not accessible from this document, copy and paste the Web address into the address block after 
accessing the Internet.
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
212 of 217
Comparison (https://www.3dpdf.com/index.php?id=1952&L=1)
c. Data Interoperability
Data and Information Policy (http://science.nasa.gov/earth-science/earth-science-data/datainformation-policy/)
M-13-13, Open Data Policy - Managing Information as an Asset (https://policy.cio.gov/opendata/)
ISO 8879, Information processing – Text and office systems – Standard Generalized Markup 
Language (SGML)
ISO 16792, Technical product documentation—Digital product definition data practices
ISO/IEC 15288, Systems and software engineering – System life cycle processes
ISO/IEC 19501, Information technology – Open Distributed Processing – Unified Modeling 
Language (UML)
ISO/IEC 19502, Information technology – Meta Object Facility (MOF)
ISO/IEC 19503, Information technology – XML Metadata Interchange (XMI)
ISO/IEC 24765:2009, Systems and software engineering - Vocabulary
ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010, Systems and software engineering – Architecture description
d. Contract Language
48 CFR § 252.227-7013 - Rights in technical data - Noncommercial items
48 CFR § 252.227-7014, Rights in Noncommercial Computer Software and Noncommercial 
Computer Software Documentation
48 CFR § 252.227-7015, Technical data - Commercial items
48 CFR § 252.227-7025, Limitations on the Use or Disclosure of Government-Furnished 
Information Marked with Restrictive Legends 
48 CFR § 252.227-7037, Validation of Restrictive Markings on Technical Data
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
213 of 217
48 CFR § 227.7103-6, Contract Clauses
48 CFR § 227.7103-7, Use and Non-disclosure Agreement
48 CFR § 227.7103-13, Government Right to Review, Verify, Challenge, and Validate Asserted 
Restrictions
ISO 10303-203, Industrial automation systems and integration — Product data representation 
and exchange — Part 203: Application protocol: Configuration controlled 3D design of 
mechanical parts and assemblies
ISO 10303-209, Industrial automation systems and integration - Product data representation and 
exchange - Part 209: Application protocol: Multidisciplinary analysis and design
ISO 10303-210, Industrial automation systems and integration - Product data representation and 
exchange - Part 210: Application protocol: Electronic assembly, interconnect and packaging 
design
ISO 10303-214, Industrial Automation Systems and Integration - Product Data Representation 
and Exchange - Part 214: Application Protocol: Core Data for Automotive Mechanical Design 
Processes
ISO 10303-233, Industrial automation systems and integration - Product data representation and 
exchange - Part 233: Application protocol: Systems engineering
ISO 10303-238, Standard for the Exchange of Product (STEP) Model Data, PART 238:
Application interpreted model for computer numeric controllers
ISO 10303-239, Industrial automation systems and integration - Product data representation and 
exchange - Part 239: Application protocol: Product life cycle support
ISO 10303-242, Industrial automation systems and integration – Product data representation and 
exchange – Part 242: Application protocol: Managed model-based 3D engineering
NIST 800 Series Publications
e. Contract Language for Defining Data Interoperability
DFARS 252.227-7026, Deferred Delivery of Technical Data or Computer Software
DFARS 252.227-7027, Deferred Ordering of Technical Data or Computer Software
NASA-HDBK-1004
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE—DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED
This document has been reviewed by the KSC Export Control Office and it has been determined that it does 
not meet the criteria for control under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) or Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR). Reference EDR Log #: _6808_ NASA KSC Export Control Office, (321) 
867-9209.
214 of 217
48 CFR § 52.227-11, Patent Rights - Ownership by the Contractor
48 CFR § 52-227-12, Reserved
48 CFR § 52-227-13, Patent Rights-Ownership by the Government
48 CFR § 52.227-14, Alternates II and III, Rights in Data—General
48 CFR § 52-227-15, Representation of Limited Rights Data and Restricted Computer Software
48 CFR § 52.227-16, Additional Data Requirements
48 CFR § 52-227-17, Rights in Data-Special Works
48 CFR § 52-227-18, Rights in Data-Existing Works
48 CFR § 52-227-19, Commercial Computer Software License
48 CFR § 52.227-20, Rights in Data-SBIR Program
f. Exchanging and Distributing 3D Models
ISO 10303, STEP (Standard for the Exchange of Product model data) - ISO global standard 
ISO 14306, Industrial automation systems and integration -- JT file format specification for 3D 
visualization
ISO 14739-1, Document management — 3D use of Product Representation Compact (PRC)
format, Part 1: PRC 10001 
ISO 32000-1:2008, Document Management – Portable document format – Part I: PDF 1.7 – First 
edition
g. Other Neutral Formats not listed in Table 3
DXF (Drawing Exchange Format) – AutoDesk
ANS US PRO/IPO-100-1996, IGES (Initial Graphics Exchange Specification), Version 5.3, 
United States Product Data Association (US PRO). Note: No further work is being done on this 
standard, and US PRO closed in 2006.
ISO/IEC 8632:1999, CGM (Computer Graphics Metafile) (www.iso.org)
NASA-HDBK-1004
